<p>*TEXT-PV010026  Wednesday 30 October 1968             4136 4080   24   32</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (Silence) I was sort of surprised yesterday at the reaction I had when left and uhm you had a telephone call.  Because I had always thought if I met somebody right outside the door here, I would feel terribly embarrassed and uhm, just very upset that I had to see anybody or have them see me.  And that didn't bother me when the girl was calling you.  But what bothered me, was I felt sort of resentful that there was anybody calling you while I was still here.  And, and, as if this was still my time and I didn't want somebody else encroaching on it.  (Pause) And I suppose I had another reaction too, although I'm not ready to really admit it to myself, because I thought that she was very pretty and I think I must have felt some kind of envy or, I don't know — almost a competitive feeling.</p>

<p>ANALYST: You don't like to feel that way?</p>

<p>PATIENT:  No.  Partly because rationally I tell myself that there's absolutely no reason I should feel competitive with her.  And then I suppose I'm also feeling that, rationally again, that feeling envious doesn't do any good and it's sort of a poor kind of emotion to have anyhow.  And I suppose I was envious of her partly because as I recall, her, her kind of appearance was sort of a very open free type.  Uhm, I don't know exactly how to express it, but she just seemed to — she made me feel that she was very confident and uhm, she'd look however she wanted.  And because I don't feel free that way, I suppose that would be another reason I'd feel envious.  (Silence) And I think when I went away I wanted to think that you were angry at her too for interrupting.  Although, in a sense she hadn't interrupted, but until I think I walk out of the other door, I feel that anything that would happen would be an interruption.  (Pause) Maybe I just wanted you to do that so that then that would be a support in my kind of feeling.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And I was just thinking.  And again, this is something that I don't know whether I'm letting myself admit to myself, but, I was just wondering how much the fact that she was a very attractive person bothered me.  Because sh— she has some association with you in the part of your life that I know nothing about.  And it used to bother me when I saw you in the hall with the other people that I see when I'm waiting out front.  But seeing her didn't bother me in the same way.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Did you have any fantasy about what you thought the association would be?  I mean —</p>

<p>PATIENT:  Not too much.  Just that it must be fairly familiar because she called you by your first name.  I think the only fantasy I might have had or at least the one I'm admitting to myself, is that you were angry at her for interrupting.  What I thought was interrupting.  But then I don't know whether I wasn't letting myself have any other fantasy or whether I just didn't want to.  Or whether I did and I won't admit it.  (Coughs; pause) But I suppose basically there was, for whatever the reasons and there probably were several, a feeling of competition with her.  Whether it was because we were both competing for your time right when I was leaving or the fact that she was attractive, or what.  It all just seems to come down to the feeling of competition.  And I th—, and I must have wanted to feel that, for whatever reason, in a sense you were going to reject her for me.  And therefore you'd be angry at her for interrupting.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I suppose this is what I do whenever I'm letting people in any thing or dealing with people in anything.  That even if it's very subtle, there's always a feeling of competition.  I think it, that even happens at parties.  Now, I — just suddenly stuck me that knowing how I react to obvious competition and how I just kind of cave in.  I must also feel that everybody else at parties are competition to me in conversation or in being attractive enough conversationally, so that people will want to come back and, or stay.  And so I just kind of collapse, and I can't do anything.  And at school, instead of collapsing I either make excuses or get very defensive, and, and then just sort of grit my teeth and work harder.  So I suppose there are two ki—, kinds of competition.  And the one kind involving work I feel I can do something about, and the other kind, which is more social, I just don't feel I can do anything about at all.  (Pause) Because just in playing games, I know playing tennis or bridge or something, I know my feeling is that if I lose or play poorly, I will be less acceptable.  And so then I play poorly so that I suppose in a way I can tell myself, well, I didn't really try.  So it really doesn't matter.  (2-minute silence)</p>

<p>I was just thinking about how sometimes when you're looking at me when I'm coming or leaving.  You seem one way and then sometimes you see—, seem another.  And I was just wondering how much it's just me assigning these different things to you.  Because I remember at the very beginning you seemed kind of threatening.  And I don't know exactly, I can't remember no exactly how except maybe sort of distant or disapproving or —.  Oh, I don't know, but, and then sometimes, especially at the end of uhm some days, it seemed like you were looking at me very kindly and again, probably were looking exactly the same way.  And then sometimes, recently, it's, seemed almost as if you were shy or something, especially when you're standing aside so I can either go out or come in, and —.  I suppose that's partly the reason I'm thinking of you as being shy, is because I, when you step back that's the way I always feel about other people: and sort of stepping back out of their way.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But then it bothers me that I have to keep again, almost putting you in a position where I can understand you.  I can't accept you as just being kind of neutral (cough) uh, you have to have (cough) some emotional response to me, or I have to put some adjective to you, and I, so that I, so it's familiar and understandable.  (Pause) And I suppose one way, one reason it bothers me is because I f—, feel as if I'm sort of missing the point.  But mainly because then it comes into my mind and I feel I have to talk about it, and I don't like talking about it.  Because again, it's something else that seems so personal and I would never say something as frank as this to anybody else.  And I don't know why I'd be afraid of saying something frank to somebody else.  But it just came into my mind that today when I was talking to one of the parents, uhm, she's been concerned about her son because he does have certain definite problems and in a way he is very immature because of these problems.  But I've never dealt with a child like this before and my feeling this year has been that the kind of immaturity he has can be handled and that he'll be alright.  But since I've never come across this before, I'm not sure.  And she's been so worried about it that she, when I've seen her before, she's kind of asked me, and today she just point blank asked me, well is he, how does he stand in relation to the other boys and should he be at this school at all and is he too immature for the group and so forth.  And I was trying to answer her honestly because it seemed only the fair thing to do, but I think I was afraid to because I thought well, may—, what if I'm wrong.  And then I've sort of put myself out on a limb or opened myself up again.  And I think at the time I was thinking but it now seems like I was, it was just a positive way to say it to myself, but I was thinking that I should be careful what I say because it would be unfair to mislead her.  But really I think I was just afraid of saying something that wouldn't be true.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And another thing that happened with this same mother, uhm, and in this case I think I feel that I did the right thing, but it makes me think of something I'm inclined to do anyway.  She mentioned that she will soon be going to the hospital for an operation and I expressed concern just simply so that it wouldn't seem like I didn't think going in for an operation was nothing.  And then we talked about how this might affect her boy.  But then she kept wanting to talk about her own view of the operation and how she was worried and hoped it would turn out alright and didn't like hospitals or operations anyway.  And at that point I almost felt like she wanted just to talk about herself and her own insecurities about it.  And maybe I should have asked her questions that were personal to her about it.  But I didn't.  And I know, and I think with her I was right not to, but this is something I do anyway, that I find even somebody's giving me the clue that they want to talk about something personally but they just want me to ask questions so they can keep on, I find it very hard to ask personal questions.</p>

<p>And this has been true of my mother because all through high school and afterwards, she would never, or any time, she would never ask us any personal questions that I can remember.  And I know her thinking was, because I'm sure she's expressed it at times, that if something was bothering us, we'd come to her and she didn't want to pry in personal affairs.  But again I think I must have taken her not asking personal questions a sign of lack of interest.  And maybe occasionally she tried to, but when she did she was so awkward at it that it was even worse.  So I never could really talk to her about all the different things that disturbed me.  I must have, I think I did occasionally, very occasionally.  And then it would be some very specific problem, it wouldn't be the general things bothering me.  And she could always be very good in helping me cope with that individual thing.  But she never made me feel I wanted to go to her for the real basic problems whenever I could see them as real problems.  And I know I used to turn to my father for some guidance in what boys were like and how, how, a girl could relate to boys, at my age, being in high school then.  And I can remember different times using different ways to approach it, trying to find out what boys thought then and how could I be more natural with them and so forth, and he, he, he never could really be much help to me.  And I think he almost didn't understand what was bothering me.  But even if he did, I don't know whether he could have helped.  I don't know if he had the way to make clear whatever it was that I wanted to know.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I think too, the way my parents reacted to my friends whenever I did bring them home, my father would just hardly even know they were there.  And my mother was always, again, very reserved and formal with them.  And even if they came around again and again, she never was relaxed and natural and so forth.  And of course this was the way she was with all of us.  But I think I must have taken it almost as a rejection of my friends.  Or I took it somehow, because I know I hated to, after a while, bring friends home.  And I was disappointed maybe even resentful of the fact that she never said, well, wouldn't it be nice for so and so to stay for supper, or something.  And kind of express pleasure that somebody would be coming around.  And she never did that until I went to college.  And then I had for freshman year a roommate that both my parents responded to for some reason.  And I never quite understood exactly why.  She's a very nice girl, but (cough) she's never been my very best friend.  And I've only just liked her and, and appreciated what is very nice about her.  But both my parents responded in, in a very deep way, really, for them.  And it's the only, well since then, after that, they did to some other friends of mine.  But again, I think this must have bothered me, that when they finally wholly accepted somebody, it was somebody that I didn't feel that close to.  And almost as if there was something wrong with the people I chose to be friends or that they were criticizing my choices or —.  I don't know, but it just made me question that that kinds of friends I had and why couldn't I feel closer to this girl if my parents thought she was so wonderful.  (Pause)</p>

<p>When I was talking about my mother's reaction to not asking me questions, I just remembered something else came to my mind, on, I do—, again, this must have been in high school, maybe earlier, but at times when I'd be asked to do something or maybe a boy would ask me out, I would want her to provide me with the excuse so I could say no.  Or I'd turn to my parents for the excuse for coming home early or for a deadline anyway in having to be home by a certain time.  And I wanted them to set a certain time, because I was almost only going out with the boys because I felt I should.  In a way I wanted to, in that I wanted to be able to be dating boys.  But also I thought well, maybe I can learn something and maybe next time it'll be easier if I do it this time.  And other people are this way, and I'll be unnatural if I'm not.  But I was afraid of it, so I wanted them to tell me I had to be home at a fairly early hour, so that the evening would be over soon.</p>

<p>And I think my mother said once that I used to always, when someone was asking me to do something, turn to her and say, say to her, so and so is asking me and then I'd ask her, either whisper to her or if I'd went away from the phone, ask her to say no, so that I could go back and say that she said no.  And again, I think she, maybe she realized fully what bothered me, why I had to do that, but it seems to me now, or it seemed to me when she re—, told me this thing, that she was aware I had some kind of a problem, but she didn't know exactly what it was.  Or she couldn't help me with it, or, or just that she thought that was kind of an amusing little detail about me.  Whereas to me, it seems like I was really asking for help on something and there wasn't any help there.  Because I think I was asking for something way beyond just saying no now, I was in effect telling her that somehow I couldn't control things that I wanted to control.  And I just never got any kind of response.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I was just wondering now if uhm, I went back to the feeling I had about my friends because of my parents' reaction, and it made me think of the fact that I used to also be critical of my friends because I felt FYC had nicer friends.  And so then I was trying to think if my parents were more responsive to her friends.  And certainly when she was in college it seemed that my parents were more openly responsive to a variety of her friends.  And it seemed to me that there was just this one girl that they really wholeheartedly welcomed.  And this might, maybe this gave me some of that feeling too.  I know it used to especially bother me though, the (coughs) fact that the girl that I grew up with and except for the short time when she was ostracized from the group, but I used to do really a fair amount of things with, and she was always over in our house.  And then my parents were good friends with hers, and it just seemed if there were anybody in my life that my parents would both be very natural with and relaxed with, that she would be the one.  And they just never were.  And I'm not sure exactly how it made me feel, but I know it disturbed me very much that when I went up to her house I would get such a nice welcome and such an open and affectionate welcome.  And yet when she came to my house, the way they treated her was almost as if they'd met her for the second time.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I think I went through a period, I don't know when this was, but, and I don't know why it started, except I know that at one point FYC or I or somebody in my family and I talked a little bit about it, but in thinking that if my parents died, who would I want to live with and grow up with, which of their friends.  And I think often I would think I'd want to grow up with FN's mother.  This is the girl I grew up with.  Because she was so very openly affectionate with me and made me feel so wonderful at that time.  And then there was another couple that were good friends of my parents and I think they would have been the ones that we would actually have been assigned to, if we were assigned to anybody.  But the uhm, man was extremely easy with people.  He just, there is just nobody that he meets that he can't immediately be very natural with and bring out.  And so of course, I liked being around him too.  Because he seems to have a genuine appreciation of people just for whatever they are.  I think FN's mother bothers me a little now, because it's a little bit too much, her reaction to people.  And so in a way I don't feel that she's always really feeling anything.  But it meant a lot to me when I was growing up.  But Mr DPN, the man in the other family, I feel very much that he's very genuine and very sincere and even now, if I sense a disapproval on his part, I really am upset at it.  Because I feel it means something, since he is so rarely disapproving.  And he's the only one of my parents' friends who's ever criticized something we do in the family.  And I suppose when he criticized it for the first time, it made me aware of it in a way I'd never been before.  And this was the way we talk, have discussions at the dinner table.  And I think I've mentioned this.  In the way we're so aggressive with each other and almost shouting to each other.  And, and you have to fight to get into it.  And he once criticized it in a joking way.  And I think he did it because he had been trying to have a conversation and it was just so frustrating to him, he finally had to say something.  And he is such a close friend of the family.  He, I suppose, could say this.  But after he said it, it made me, well it made me very upset for a while.  And it might have been after that point that I had this desire to separate myself from this kind of activity and competition in a way.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And I was just thinking of the fact that well, I was thinking of FGR BBP, this friend of my mother's, who, who's also a very close friend, and occasionally has gently made some criticism of perhaps an attitude my parents have or something my father's done.  But never, certainly never when we were growing up.  And now to me she rarely will say much of anything.  And she has a very different view on a lot of subjects.  And so she will argue with my parents, or she will discuss it, my father will argue with her and be very, almost nasty sometimes.  And he kind of reduces it to calling her names.  And making fun of her in a way, which I've always felt was very unkind and unfair.  But then I was just thinking of the fact that in so many things, I sort of feel I'm not in agreement with my parents.  But somehow I feel it's disloyal not to be or I feel I must be wrong not to agree with them.  One or the other.  And I was just wondering how much they have disguised the fact that they want to control what we think by making us feel we are disloyal if we don't agree.  For instance, I think just the fact that I would go through psychoanalysis made me feel disloyal to my parents in a way.  Because somehow my father could never accept the idea, I'm sure and my mother has already expressed that she doesn't really think it's such a good idea.  Although she's never flatly said it's bad.  And if —</p>

<p>ANALYST: They don't know yet, or —</p>

<p>PATIENT:  No.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Ah.</p>

<p>PATIENT:  I don't know if they ever will.  Certainly anyway, I'm not ready to tell them yet, because I know still if I did, it would be sort of flaunting it in their face, saying well, you weren't so perfect as parents as you think.  But also the fact that so far, MSCZ and I can handle paying for it, but if ever we had to go into savings, most of our savings are ones I had before we were married, that MSCZ has reinvested and then perhaps made so much, so much more money on.  But essentially it's money I had and that means it's money my father gave me.  And I just feel very uncomfortable to think that I'll use money he gave me to pay for something he doesn't approve of.  But I think the other thing that bothers me about using those savings is that they, both my parents always impressed on us the need to save and have a good backlog in the bank so you're ready for some eventuality, whatever it may be.  But the thing I never understood is when do you decide that this is the eventuality and you use the money for this.</p>

<p>And I think the other thing that disturbed me about this feeling about savings is that it implies a lack of confidence in yourself, that you can, for instance, if you use up your savings because something does happen that you do have to use it on, they, they don't ever want their savings used up and it makes me feel that it's almost saying, that you don't really have confidence that you can build it up again.  And it, and it seems almost saying in a different way what I felt FEIR, uhm, MSCZ's parents were saying to his sister FEIR, about, keep this job now because you probably won't ever get as good a one again.  And then just this whole compulsion about saving.  I suppose it's in a way related to my need to keep things and save papers and notes and my mother's little piles all around, because she can't really take care of them and throw things away.  And my father's inability to throw old clothes away.  And the whole thing seems all kind of tied up together.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Well, our time's up.</p>