<p>*TEXT-PV010017  Wednesday 16  October 1968             5410 5298   28   84</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: (2-minute silence) For some reason I feel ridiculous saying this so I'm finding it hard to make myself but when I got on the couch today and realized I was way over to one side it made me think of the way I usually am in bed at night and the fact that on the whole I think I lie way over to one side too and I don't know if I wake up not way over and I'm always surprised.  Because usually I do kind of stay in one place.  It's sort of again a rigid control what I'm doing.  And then it made me think of the fact that even if I here were uncomfortable after I lay down I probably would just stay where I was rather than move about.</p>

<p>ANALYST: And the idea seemed ridiculous to you?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Yes.  Partly because I didn't want to call attention to the fact of how (laughing) I was lying.  Because I again I think my, well I think I sort of want  to move more into the middle but I don't want to.  Once I lie down I don't want to move.  The connection with how I get in bed at night is I don't think is ridiculous, I just feel ridiculous saying it.  (Pause) And it's funny too because on the one hand I don't, I, I'm not aware of feeling that I don't want things to be intimate between me and MSCZ but yet there are lots of times when if he wants to have intercourse or something well, it always ends up that he wants it even if it doesn't start that way but uhm, I just have this feeling that if I have to verbalize why I'm drawing away it's because what I say is that it's just too intimate and I can't somehow either let myself go or I can't stand the intimacy or the pressure he's, well, it's not the pressure he's putting on me to resp—, well it is sort of the pressure he's putting on me to respond, it's not that exactly though.  Again, somehow he's asking too much.  And maybe that's why I lie way over on one side of the bed.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And my inclination when I feel that way is just to roll up in a ball and —.  It's just very upsetting when it happens because it's not something that I'm aware is going to happen and then just suddenly I find I'm doing it and I don't want to have him doing anything with me at all and I just can't seem to stop from withdrawing then.  (Pause) And then other times I don't feel that way at all and I've tried to think about what might be different to cause me to feel that way or if it's just something else or if it's the mood I'm in or I, I just haven't been able to see what type of pattern it is that comes before when I react that way.  Except last night I, happened last night and I felt sort of vaguely upset and restless and that things were bothering me that I didn't know about and I don't know whether that's why because I was already withdrawn in myself or whether it's something unrelated to that.  And I have another reaction too because if, if I withdraw from him and he shows that it upset him which it must be very upsetting to him to have happen but if he makes it quite clea—, clear that it was instead of sort of understanding and not being upset obviously, then I immediately feel guilty and I also feel that then I have to be much warmer to him and open up to him and uhm sometimes after that I don't again withdraw and sometimes I again do and I can't again control it but sometimes that's, all he has to do is show that he's very upset and then, then I can control this feeling of needing to withdraw.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST: Do you remember what you were thinking about when you felt withdrawn, when you went to bed last night?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, I didn't realize, well —</p>

<p>ANALYST: You didn't realize you were feeling that way?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, I realized I was feeling sort of restless and I didn't really want him to ask something of me like having intercourse but I don't know that I was thinking about it that much.  Although MSCZ has often complained that I arrange things so that it's practically impossible for him to want to have intercourse with me because either I arrange to go to bed late enough so that I just, it's too late and I'll be nervous about not having enough sleep or we might be away somewhere and then I'm, feel I just can't because I'm in a strange place or often times will have an excuse and I have to sort of work myself up ahead of times in many cases in order to, it's sort of well I haven't let him have intercourse with me for such a long time I really should now and it must, it probably was on my mind because last night I was very tired and then I went to bed early and so of course immediately he thought well here is an opportunity and I think I was hoping that he wouldn't think that yet I knew he would, so perhaps I was already prepared to withdraw, but it was, last night anyway, it was a stronger feeling, I mean, I just sometimes I can control it but, I didn't want to touch him, a I didn't want him to touch me and, and that's about as extreme as it's ever been.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I don't know whether it came partly because I had been talking about that accident yesterday.  But something, something else that came to my mind in regard to it, uhm, which may have absolutely no connection but threshold of the room, my brother was sleeping then and I had been playing with him and was just leaving his room when I, when the stick got caught on the floor, got caught on the threshold and uhm then later that room became my room.  And I just remember a lot of times when I was in high school and I'd get up and just when I'd get to the door I'd get very dizzy and every once in a while I actually blacked out and, and came to on the floor.  And I always thought it was just getting up out of bed and the blood not being in my head or whatever and just blacking out.  And I never said anything about it to anybody.  But I just expected that by the time I'd get to the door I'd have to hang on to the door frame for a while until I was clear.  And uhm, then years later I, my mother was saying that my younger sister na once in a while was blacking out and she got up and she seemed a little bit concerned but then kind of indicated well this will happen and then I told her that it had happened to me too and she seemed surprised.  So then I thought well maybe it was sort of unusual but I still didn't think anything of it but last night or this morning I don't remember when I thought of it, I it just  PMIcurred to me that it was always at the threshold which is right where I had the accident and I just again was wondering if it was any connection because it seemed that if you're going to black out from getting out of bed fast, you'd do it much sooner.  My bed was way at the other end of the room.  So I had to walk a ways before I got to the door.  And it may have, maybe it happened other times too, but I have no memory of it happening any other time except when I was in that room.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But then I keep thinking that well, at least now it can't just, it seems that it isn't just one incident that ever really affects you, its a series of them or ones similar ones happening over and over again and that just, I keep thinking well how could some one thing like that really affect me anyway, so maybe I'm trying to make it be more important than it really is.  And I was thinking too about how knowing a lot of these things, how can it help me.  And I realize to some extent that if you can sort of anticipate a reaction you're going to have because you understand now that certain situations are going to cause certain reactions in you, you can, even though the reaction might  PMIcur, control it or get over it faster but then today I uhm, got into a situation where I knew what my reaction was going to be and I still don't feel I really handled it.  I was it was again about this bird and I ran into the mother of the boy who had the bird on the street and asked her how he'd been when he got home because I wondered if he'd really been upset at losing the bird, for the bird, and uhm, well, she said he was extremely upset and it took him an, a long time, all afternoon to get him calmed down and this kind of annoyed me because I just couldn't believe he really had been and then uhm, she went on that he kept being upset that we hadn't allowed him to take it, meaning the school and that we were going to put it to sleep which was not definitely the possibility unless it was diseased or too sick to live and it just seemed as if she were kind of accusing me with her boy and I knew I'd react this way if I spoke to her about it and if she didn't just say oh it was all right, we handled it all right or something.  And if she didn't sort of take a partnership in it.  And so I just got very, feeling very defensive again and I, I was with some other teachers and I had this need to talk about it and try to get them to tell me that I'd done the right thing again and I, I don't know, I just couldn't control that feeling.  And some one incident like that upsets, upsets me enough so that I know from past experience that it'll just keep being on my mind and oh, tonight I'd have to talk about it with MSCZ and then I wouldn't be able to let it go and I'd try to make him tell me that there was nothing else that I could have done and I just dwell on it and go over it and over it.  And I'm sure that my reacting in this way and taking it to start with the way I do must be partly why the parents who are the ones upsetting me are reacting the way they are, but I can't seem to think it through first so that I don't set up the situation again.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  But you were feeling guilty before you even talked to the mother, right?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Yes.  Unless she'd said the boy wasn't that upset, or you were right or something of that nature.  (Pause) And I can see I was being unfair to the mother too because in a way I was putting it all on her, making her be the one to say no.  (Pause) But I know now when I think about it I just get sort of mad and think well, what I should have done was just let him take the bird home and then she could do what she wanted.  Because I think I feel underneath it all that her implications is that, you know, maybe she would have wanted to keep it and that I didn't even let her decide either.  That I'd sort of made the decision for all of them and then I wonder if I'm imagining her whole reaction.  (2-minute silence)</p>

<p>It was funny too when I was talking about the party I'd gone to yesterday, uh, the party I went to Monday night but talking about it yesterday I had said that generally I had had a good time and the uhm, the one incident I described seemed to be about the only thing that had upset me about the party but yet I some kind of vague feeling about it that wasn't right and it just never came to my mind.  One thing that I'm sure was extremely upsetting to me uhm, and that was that MSCZ and I had not brought a present for the girl.  And I had discussed this with MSCZ and he had said that the girl's husband didn't want people bring—, he hoped people wouldn't be bringing presents and I had made something for the dinner and he had, MSCZ had said that he thought that was enough and that's all I really had to hear because I really hate buying presents because I again can never make up my mind what would be appropriate.  And I think I had decided in my own mind that if I saw some little silly type thing that I could bring I would, but then it just didn't  PMIcur to me until too late to buy something that afternoon and we got there that evening and of course, everybody had brought gifts and some where really quite nice and so then we were about it seemed like we were the only ones who hadn't.  There may have been others and I was just feeling again guilty that well, may—, I don't know if guilty is the word, but you know I was feeling very badly in any case that we hadn't brought something.  Almost as if she would like us less because we hadn't or the people again would look at us as if well what was the matter with them or were they too cheap or you know, some attitude of that nature.  And I know it really bothered me.  Because I, when I saw the situation there was nothing I could do and yet I had to keep worrying over it.  And I think too gifts has a certain meaning for me in that the people's attitude toward me is going to be affected by what gift I give them and uhm, almost sometimes I think when it's with my family that I can win or loose approval or standing in their affections by the kind of gift I give.  So I find it very hard to choose a gift because I'm putting so much weight on it.  And that if I choose just the right thing then they'll think a lot more of me.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And again I know I can think of several incidents with my father on gift giving that must have something to do with why I have the reactions I do to it, but I don't know in quite what way.  One thing I think of is his, on his birthday uhm, he would always be, try to be nice about what we gave him as children, although very often you could see right through his thank you if he didn't really like it or couldn't see any use for it.  But he'd be very hard on my mother in what she'd give him and make a lot of fun of some things that she'd give him as if they had no use.  Uhm, I don't know it was sometimes he might have liked it in the end but so often it just seemed like well that was kind of stupid to give me.  That seemed to be the attitude he implied and the way he was joking about it and I used to wonder how my mother could stand it.  I would be so hurt if it were me that he reacted that way.  Or if he expressed pleasure it so often just seemed to be faked pleasure at other people's gifts that, you know, I just thought he was sitting there as the biggest critic of what kind of gifts he would receive and then yet when he gave us gifts he would be terribly anxious that we'd like it and he'd have to talk about it and explain why he wanted to give it and I don't know, he'd just put an awful lot on you as a receiver when he was the giver.  And I know I do this too.  And if a person seems to be at all displeased or if it might be something that just isn't appropriate or something if it's a gift of clothes that they can't wear because it doesn't fit I become very apologetic and I can see in this respect I react quite the same way my father does and I don't want to and I'll think before somebody's getting a gift from me well I'm not going to do it this time and then I'll find myself doing it again.  And I find accepting gifts hard too.  I suppose I just both my father and I have this problem of both giving and receiving it, can't do either too well and I know when I was engaged and realized there'd be some showers for me, I just dreaded them because I'd have to sit there and have everybody watching me while I opened presents and then have to say something appropriate and show pleasure and all these things and I just felt I didn't really know what—, how, if I could do it.  (Pause) And I can't tell which is, what comes first.  Whether because I find receiving a gift so hard comes from the fact that I react the way I do when I'm the giver.  And therefore I think other people would be the same about how they feel as the giver.  Or if the way I give gifts (chuckle) makes me react the way I do when I'm receiving them.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And I do think too if I feel any kind of relationship is inadequate then and there is a time when I give a gift to that person, I feel that I can make it up through the gift something I can't do in just general daily relationships.  (Pause) It's almost as though I'm trying to make guilt work for me because then if I give a gift to them and make it look like I've been very thoughtful then they will have to feel guilty in the future.  If they don't think well of me even if I'm doing something which is causing an awkward situation and, and a time when they might not think so highly of me.  Because I know, I'm sure that I did this last year with my assistant whom sometimes I get very annoyed at and probably treated quite unfairly at times because of my own problems and so I used giving her a Christmas gift as a way to kind of make up to her or to make her think better of me and I know I did it with y's husband too when I think it was one of the first Christmases after they were married and I just had found him very hard to relax with and get to know.  In fact when I came back from PEC that first time I met him I think I was about as open with him as I have ever been for a long time and I, it just seemed like every time we get together, things got worse.  And I became more reserved and he seemed shy and more reserved until we were practically pretending neither of us was there.  And so at Christmas I had heard he wanted an atlas and so naturally I had to go out and buy one of the most elaborate atlases and beautifully bound and all this, instead of just giving him a nice, good atlas.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I was wondering too what, what there was in him and in me that made us so strange with each other.  And also boys that are finding it kind of hard to relate with others in the room usually find me hard to relate to.  Whereas they don't my assistant because I think she is very ready to be exuberant with them and, and affectionate and friendly and somehow she doesn't get stopped by any moodiness or lack of communication on their part, so then they very soon open up to her and whereas I am very sensitive to any withdrawal on their part and if they do then I will too in return, and so we sort of close off communication.  And I was just wondering if that was what happened with my brother-in-law or if it were something else, because it's only now that I've really just decided well, it's ridiculous to be somewhere and hardly even talk to each other and it's not a matter of being mad at each other, not talking, but just sort of being afraid to talk to each other.  And then it makes me feel especially strange because right after FYC had her first child I spent about two weeks with them and I had hoped then that I would get to know MEIR better and relax more with him and it, I did to an extent but not, it didn't last and it wasn't really getting to know each other and feeling comfortable with each other.  And this whole feeling of inadequacy with him was increased when na uhm, just very naturally warmed up to him and her to her and everything was so relaxed between them that it just made me feel all the more that I couldn't do it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I also found that 2 week period when I was staying with FYC and MEIR a very difficult one because I don't know exactly why but I'm sure I was afraid of criticism and afraid of not doing the right thing and I just never could relax that whole time that I was with them.  (Pause) And again I'd sort of gone there with a job, which was to help FYC and it was quite specific.  He can be a very critical person, was being in where I'd help FYC and I somehow felt that MEIR would or was, because very critical of the kind of job I was doing and any little comment he made which was not complimentary I took very much to heart.  Even to something like they, they had a, access to a garden and if I picked too many string beans or something and he made some comment about there were too many string beans, he didn't like having left overs and there were too many to eat, and I would feel this was the worst criticism that he could have made to me and I'd get all defensive again and feel I had to justify myself and it just seemed like the whole 2 weeks I was feeling either that I was going to do something that he'd criticize or that I had and that he had already criticized it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And of course FYC sort of set him up that way too because now if she's for instance thanking you for a gift her greatest praise of what you decide to give them would be that even MEIR liked it.  And that's practically the way she would say it.  Even if it isn't a gift to him at all.  (Pause) And an—, another incident of feeling guilty when I was staying with them was, that FYC was supposed to rest in the afternoon for one or two hours and MEIR was very adamant that he wanted to be sure she was getting rest and so he wanted to be sure I was shouldering enough of the responsibility so that she would take a rest which I felt was kind of insulting the way he said it, but in any case often he'd call in the afternoon and I used to think he was doing it just to check and make sure she was taking a rest, but the telephone would ring right by her bed and if she weren't asleep she'd answer it.  And I can remember feeling that I'd have to just practically kill myself to get to the phone first so then I could prove to him that I was on the job and doing what he'd ask me to do, and being really afraid of him if she got, if she answered the phone first.  Because somehow then he'd be thinking I hadn't been doing what I was supposed to be doing.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  What were you ostensibly there for?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Well, really to relieve her of having to do things like uhm, cooking, well, not always cooking meals, but somewhat cooking meals or doing any washing and uhm light housecleaning because they had a house cleaner.  And just generally to help her out so she didn't get too tired.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  Well, perhaps I forgot something about it.  Was there some spe—, was she sick or, —</p>

<p>PATIENT: No, she just had a baby.  (Chuckle)</p>

<p>ANALYST:  Oh, she just had a baby, I see.</p>

<p>PATIENT: Yes.  And she had it uhm, but you know, some people won't have any help the attitude in my family is, well of course you're going to have help because of course the woman is going to be just kn PMIked out completely and there had been a big f—, big to do, family to do about this.  I wasn't in on the whole thing but uhm, my grandmother was, it just seemed inconceivable to her that you'd even leave the hospital for the first 2 weeks after you had the baby and that you would definitely have somebody come in full time.  And FYC didn't want somebody coming in full time and uhm, she didn't, you know, I seemed like a good answer because it was right before I started work and I had finished my work at el so that I wouldn't have anything to do if I wanted to do this.  And then she would have somebody she knew and felt comfortable with.  And because the attitude on my mother's part was of course FYC is going to need a lot of help so if you do do this, you better decide you're really going to work.  And, and yet FYC didn't except for being a little more tired than usual, and therefore needing a rest at some point during the day, she didn't seem to be that much out of commission and she usually insisted on doing things anyway and I think the thing I did most was kind of be around to help watch MDI when she was taking a nap or being a companion or doing dishes and uhm washing out the baby clothes.  And it didn't really seem I had that much to do.  And so I always, I think I used to think well, I must not be doing my job because there doesn't seem to be that much to do anyway.  I don—, I never knew if another aspect of this was that uhm, when di was born FYC had at some point broken the bones way down in her spine and, and when he was born the pressure broke them again and reset them and so she had, she was quite uncomfortable for a while.  But when she came home from the hospital she, she was already alright and I don't know whether this affected MEIR's thinking or whether just anyway he's inclined to keep a very fast pace which can be very tiring for FYC and the attitude on my whole family's part is that he asks too much of her.  I don't know just what it is.  And I, I know my attitude used to be well of course FYC must be just exhausted because she's always doing too much.  And something happened recently that kind of surprised me on ch—, attitude of MSCZ because uhm, FYC just had a miscarriage and she and, her husband is going to be officiating at the sc, or is now, and so she and he were going to go together and she had the miscarriage the night before she was due to go, so she, he went ahead and then she, as soon as she left the hospital went to PMI.  And I was expressing surprise that first of all she recovered from the miscarriage, because my idea is if you have a miscarriage you must be again feeling pretty awful for a while and then why did she have a miscarriage and was it because again, because she's doing too much and afterwards MSCZ just got really mad at me and he said something to the affect that your whole family is just always thinking that y's put upon and that she's always trying to do too much or MEIR is trying to do too much with her and then he just says, what is it that she has to do.  What is it that she is doing and I suddenly realized that, when I tried to name all the things there weren't really that many things.  And it's just sort of been an attitude we all have toward her and that she kind of cultivates herself and I think I felt really confused after that.  It then began to make me wonder if my mother somehow had created this myth about what she was doing that she was doing too much or whether she really was because my attitude has always been that she was.  Now I'm not sure.  And I know if there are things that I don't want to do, my reaction to MSCZ will be don't ask me to do too much.  And somehow there's this whole attitude toward women in our family and, they're doing too much or that they shouldn't do too much or that they've bee—, not to ask them to or — (Pause)</p>

<p>And it does make me wonder about my grandmother then because for some reason she either thought childbirth was terrible for her or she did actually get worn out by it and uhm, anyway, it sounds like she had some pretty serious illnesses that you know, were, when she was extremely seriously ill and uhm greatly weakened, and just generally everybody's accepted that she was a very fragile individual, but my only impression of her is of, is of an older woman with a great deal of strength and look how long she's lived.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  This is your mother's?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Yes.  And she's still alive and so I began to, now this whole thing has made me wonder how strong she actually was and whether or not, again the attitude toward women had made her think she was much more fragile and unable to do things around the house or to recover after the birth of a child, because she had her children late, so that might have had some affect on her.  Because I think she was in her 40's when she had her last 2.  (Pause) And I have begun to see to some extent when I feel that somehow life is asking too much from me in that MSCZ might want to start having people for dinner or going out to dinner or parties or things like this and my reaction will be well you can't ask me to do too much because I'm working and this or that.  I have come to see that the only time I react that way is when I somehow feel I can't handle the situation that then makes me respond, don't ask me to do too much.  Even if it's just cleaning the house.  Sometimes I, not lately, but there have been times when I've just sat around and said I've got to make myself get up and clean the house and I just can't do it.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  Well, our time's up.</p>