<p>*TEXT-PV010933 Wednesday 26 September 1973</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (Sniff, sniff, pause, sniff, pause, sniff, sniff, sniff, deep exhale) Well, I'm thinking of some things I was thinking of before I came in, but I know the first thing I thought of when I did come in was that I didn't want to have the same feeling of awkwardness and, you know, all the different things I was feeling on Monday when I came in, when I wanted to look at you and then couldn't.  And, uhm, but yet sort of was like I used willpower to do it today.  I mean it still wasn't a comfortable kind of feeling and yet it was better than Monday.  uhm, (sniff) but then and then something to do with my mother I've been thinking about, but the next thing I think I thought of once I was in here after thinking of how I felt more comfortable today than I did on Monday coming in.</p>

<p>Uhm, I started thinking immediately about the situation at home over whose going to take care of FSO and I was supposed to hear tonight from one girl who was considering doing, living in and doing everything except I hope, well, there were 2 possibilities, 1 was she'd do all the cleaning and the other was she would take a, a lower salary and not do all of it so I could keep the woman I have for cleaning.  uhm, and I told her if she wanted to do everything I'd ha—, I'd still have to think about it because I wanted to keep the woman if I could. (sniff)  uhm, but I had asked LDJ, I had already talked to her about her doing everything and she didn't want to because it would mean hours off and o— and so forth.  But then, uhm, when it seemed, if the girl, FKC says "no" I didn't know what I'd do and so I spoke to LDJ again yesterday about her doing the time I'm at school and then I'd look for somebody to live in in exchange for babysitting when I come here, like FMX did.  uhm, and today she said she would do it, but then, and I was, you know, pleased about that, but then, this, uhm, this afternoon I spoke to the mother of one of the children FSO goes to school with and one of the children that would be in the pool going to school and asked her if she wanted to start the pool and she said she didn't think LDJ, the woman, uhm, that's with FSOZ now is ready to take more than FSO.  And she went on and on about things that she didn't think she was handling well with FSO, with, and she did say she didn't want to be critical but that just she didn't want to entrust her child with this woman.  And this really upset me, uhm, because everything I've seen LDJ do at home has been, you know, the kind of thing I wanted.  uhm, sometimes I think lately I've wondered if she's gotten i—, if she's a bit cold.  At first she wasn't at all, and I, I don't know uhm, you know, there was a little something that was bothering me, but (sigh) really not enough.  And she generally seems quite fond of FSO, and uhm, she has extremely good references.  She showed me those one day and I've just seen her be very capable.  So this really upset me when FEN, this other mother, started in on all these things.  And it wasn't just through her babysitter, but she had seen what she considered some of these things herself.  And (sniff) you know, so then I thought, well, is she just letting FSO sort of run wild and not controlling her, uhm, because I've never seen her out with FSO.  I don't know, just the whole thing and how I can handle it.  uhm, because we're going to have this pool and, and the other mothers have to be happy with whoever I have.  I mean I can't choose who they want, but they still have to feel they can entrust their child to, in my babysitter's care.  And, I mean it really kind of upset me when FEN said this.</p>

<p>Uhm, and then every once in a while I think well, I had, I have a feeling about her babysitter too, that uhm, I suppose you know, everybody's going to have differences in opinion, because I don't like her babysitter at all.  And I probably spoke about it last year the times when I had the play group and this babysitter came and stayed because FRL then wasn't letting her go home.  And we had a lot of, you know, issues that arose where I had to say "Well, in my house we're doing it this way," and she was the one that started shouting at MDL not to play with the baby carriage because boys shouldn't play with it.  And, uhm, I mean she's a very heavy-handed person, and LDJ was sort of complaining about that today, that when sh—, they were coming home together, FD, this other babysitter, was, uhm, you know, sort of shouting at FSO.  And it upset her because she was there, and she was there to take care of FSO, so it wasn't FD's business then.  And, uhm, you know so then I'm wondering well do they just not get along, so FD started saying she's doing things that are not as bad or, I don't know, I can't quite know how to assess the whole situation or, what I should do.  And, uhm, I mean I've thought what I have to do is just say what I want her to do when she has FSO alone or other children out on the street, because I don't, I know I one point said she had to be sure she always held her hand crossing the street, but I don't know if I ever said anything else.  And, uhm, that would be one way to do it.  To just talk about what I thought had to be done, especially when she had 2 other children.  uhm, well, I don't know, and then I start thinking well, maybe FSO's just not going to be getting along with her and that, so then that wouldn't work out, and you know, feeling very unsure about what's going to work out.  (Exhale)</p>

<p>And it gets me back to the feeling I had a while ago right around the time I, well before school actually, you know, before the children came to school, and when I was quite concerned about how I was going to arrange things at home.  And, I just had this feeling I can't get things the way I want them to be and it was, you know, a frustrating feeling because I couldn't decide with what I had to compromise on and what I could compromise on too.  And, uhm, it's almost as if I'm beginning to feel that way again. (sniff) Well, I suppose partly because I knew for a while that, uhm, FKC would let me know today, at least she said a while ago she'd let me know today.  uhm, and so now today I have to think about more than I, I mean I've always had it in my mind, but today I really have to decide what is it I'm going to say if she says she wants to do everything.  And, which would mean I have to let the cleaning woman go, and (inhales).  Beause that's another thing, that, you know, sort of appearing from somebody else's point of view about somebody that I'm considering working for me, because FKC knows FBF, who works for the BFM, and I've think I've mentioned that.  And, uhm, FNI spoke to me, I think it was Sunday night, asking how things were going and I said well, FKC was deciding.  And then it turned out that when FKC was there, before she came to see me last week, and I knew she had been there to visit FBF, she apparently had been talking to FNI too.  And FNI started going on about how she was not happy about having to do the housework.  And I said, you know, that I had hoped she wouldn't want to.  And, uhm, then FNI said I had, she explained to her how she must stay for the full time if she took it and it made it sound like she was really thinking of not staying the full time.  And, I don't know, again getting her from somebody else's point of view disturbed me because then it kind of messed, I mean it, I don't know whether I would have seen it the same way if I had been there.  And so then I have to take in FNI's way of seeing things, just like today, FEN's way of seeing things and try to judge.  And, uhm, you know, try to decide how much to take what they say in account and how much to dismiss.  And I don't know, it just uhm, (stomach rumble) I guess with FNI I was kind of annoyed too, because it was sort of, I have this feeling about her that uh, she's managing.  And part of it is because she is, but part of it also is because of the way I choose to see her.  And, you know, or to react to her.  And, so for her to, I'm sure she thought she was helping me but then to tell me what she did only kind of upset me because this was not at all what FKC had been telling me.  And uhm, I don't know, I just uh, again these are things I could think of outside of being here.  As, you know, and I don't know where I can get by thinking of them here, because I don't really, I mean they're see—, things I have to make decisions about rather than problems to work out.  So I guess what the question would be was why would I think of it next?  And, uhm, (pause) I don't know except I, it would seem like well this is a problem that I have to make a decision on, and so it can take up my thoughts and I don't have to think about you and, and things we were talking about Monday. (Sniff)</p>

<p>Because another thing that uhm, I recall but I have, uhm, I guess not, you know, sort of pushed away because it wasn't comfortable to think about it is the last thing, you know, sort of the last thing that you said of, uhm, that my clinging to my feelings about you is what's coming between MSCZ and me.  And then that I am setting things up or I maybe said it first, I don't know, but I realized, I could see how I'm setting things up so that then you would reject me.  That somehow at some point you'd have to say well, you can't keep coming because you've gotten as far as you can if you keep persisting and wanting to, you know, hold on to these fantasies.  And, uhm, (pause) I don't know, when you said and then I could feel the martyr again, my life was ruined, like I had with my father.  That was uhm, well I know I went away thinking about it, and then I just think probably I wasn't comfortable thinking about it so I stopped thinking about it until I came back here. (Pause)</p>

<p>But I know I, uhm, I guess maybe that's why I thought of something else in connection with this, because I know in other ways I've seen, that sometimes I do set myself up to be in the martyr position.  And, one thing is, last night uhm, all along, I think I really knew, but I didn't think of it until today directly and such, that I would have preferred uhm, having come here and then going home and having my mother be there and then MSCZ coming home and, and staying there and everything being relaxed.  And in some ways I knew it would be more boring because my mother gets to be kind of funny when it's just the 3 of us.  And it's easier in a way to have her, to visit with her when we go off and do something either in a restaurant or, as we did last night, to a play because we ate at home because MSCZ couldn't join us until after dinner because he was working.  uhm, but as it turned out, everything was rushed, I had to after school, well, I have started doing shopping, main shopping on Tuesday, and uh, since I've been doing it that way other weeks and I didn't shop on Monday partly because I don't like to, things aren't always out in the store.  So I had the shopping to do and uhm, getting back and I think I was slow getting out because I wanted to, it turned out I was going to have to take FSO with me.  I hadn't gotten out of school in time to do the shopping before I came home.  uhm, and then I had to get back in time so I'd be there when my mother came and then there was getting dinner prepared because we had to eat early so we could get off in time for the theater and I knew BBG would come early for babysitting and then she gets all excited if we don't leave immediately, even though she was going to end up com— coming a bit earlier than we had to leave.  And, uhm, so I don't know the whole afternoon was sort of, you know, the partly maybe because I, I'm inclined to do this, but you know, racing to meet all these deadlines and was not relaxed and then, I made a good dinner and it turned out my mother had just had a big lunch at the meeting she'd gone to.  So she couldn't of probably cared less what she had to eat.  And she appreciated the dinner, but on the other hand it was kind of wasted, and it took, I mean anything would have taken some time to prepare, I suppose.  But, uhm, I don't know, I couldn't enjoy the dinner because I was always thinking "Well BBG is about to come and I have to at least finish eating before she comes."  And, FSO was eating with us so that was more of a worry.  And, and then we got out, oh and I know, and another thing that happened, MSCZ had not known in the morning whether he could join us or not, and so finally I had to just decide, well, I had called BBG and tell her to come later than we had originally arranged.   Because originally we had thought we might go out to eat with my mother.  But part of the trouble there too, was she wouldn't have time to see much of FSO.  So, uhm, in the end, I called BBG and told her to come later and she was disappointed.  And it also meant she'd be at our house for less time, and I don't know whether she was feeling well it would be hardly worth it.  But, in any case, MSCZ and I had talked about going out for coffee and dessert after the play, and when the play was over, since we had talked about it, I didn't feel, think I had to bring it up again.  And anyway, it's awkward bringing it up in front of my mother, because she's very much "whatever you want to do" and uhm, I thought it was decided.  And so then MSCZ said "Well, let's go home.  Let's take a taxi back home."  And I thought well maybe he wants to go to one of the places around us.  uhm, and then the next thing I knew we were in front of our apartment and I realized now that I, in a way, was choosing to assume, well, I w—, I mean I was pretending to myself that I was assuming he was doing something which he wasn't because I really knew he wasn't.  And then I felt annoyed because it wasn't the way we had planned it.  And I, we had gotten back so early that, uhm, it would have been hardly worth it for BBG.  And she wasn't expecting us that soon.  And I don't know, I just, I was tired so in a way I was just as happy to go home, but, on the other hand, I ha—, I had thought we would go out for coffee and I was kind of annoyed.  And I, and I realize too that part of my annoyance came because I guess, that I didn't say anything to MSCZ, and uhm, you know, so then again it seems like I was kind of putting myself in the martyr position.  Then I had to go home and make coffee and prepare something to eat.  And, uhm, I was sort of generally feeling annoyed that this whole visit had been a lot more work for me, and rushing around, and not pleasant because I was always working and rushing around.  But then again, I sort of set it up that way. (pause)  I mean I, I don't know, it's hard to, because I had, what I prepared for dinner was easy, you know it was quick to prepare, as anything could be.  But, (sniff) uhm, well I got some expensive meat, I suppose that was part of it.  That my mother was full enough so she really, I don't know what I would have had if I had known she was having a big lunch, but probably, you know, something like a chef s—, not a chef salad maybe exactly, but something along that lighter type of line.  And, uhm, and actually there was something else I was thinking of making then I chose not to that would have been more appropriate.  But it just somehow it seemed like everything I did frustrated me.  And then I didn't discuss things with MSCZ, with MSCZ that might have been better and in the, and I didn't state exactly what I wanted.  I mean way back when MSCZ talked about going to a play, I didn't think out my, I guess I felt ambiguous about it because it was easier going to a play than to sit home talking with my mother.  And uhm, the play was a good one.  But for all the things to work out, it would have been pl—, more pleasant to be at home than. (Sniff)</p>

<p>And I, and there was also a feeling of uhm, you know, something else that annoyed me at the play and I couldn't quite decide except I think I felt sort of outside that MSCZ and my mother were getting along and MSCZ was being very solicitous of my mother.  And, uhm, and all sorts of  situations: leaving the theater, going down the street, in all sorts of situations, he was just kind of going along listening to my mother, paying attention to her, making sure she was alright and then expecting that somewhere I'd be tagging along.  Which I suppose, really, she was the visitor and there was nothing unreasonable about what he was doing, except I felt he wasn't paying any attention to me at all, and then I felt very annoyed.  (Gurgle, pause, sniff)</p>

<p>And, I uhm, I know, because I was just thinking that when I was alone with my mother we were getting along fine, because we do on short visits.  And, as soon as MSCZ was with us, I immediately started tensing up and not being able to converse.  And, then feeling annoyed because I wouldn't be taking part in the conversation and I'd be left out of it.  And uhm, it was kind of, it would be a natural thing too, in that I was on the left side, then my mother, then MSCZ.  So, unless I leaned way in and if the two of them were more easily talking I would be left out unless I made quite an effort to be part of it.  And I was finding I was feeling, I was just feeling, uhm, very tight about conversing then, and — (Exhale, pause, sniff)</p>

<p>And I don't know, I suppose part of what I did last night too, you know, and I was thinking that I know that my mother doesn't care about certain things, but then I want to be a certain kind of hostess and entertain in a certain way.  And she likes to come and be a guest, so she does appreciate it from that point of view.  But I was thinking that somehow that was part of what annoyed me, that I felt that I had to go through certain motions when I, I could have still been probably a good hostess in my mother's eyes and not done certain things.</p>

<p>Uhm, but this morning I was thinking specifically, uhm, often MSCZ doesn't leave until after me, though lately he's been going to the office pretty early.  And this morning he did, and I was feeling kind of annoyed because it was a very difficult morning in that FSO reacted differently because my mother was there, and she wasn't as cooperative about getting ready and so forth.  And, uhm, then LDJ did come, but MSCZ left, uhm, right around the time my mother was sitting down for breakfast.  And it would have been nicer for me if he had stayed and sort of had breakfast with her and then left a bit later, which would have been, even still, earlier than his usual time.  So I didn't feel so much pressure on being the hostess and entertaining her what, and you know, I was late getting to school because I just felt very awkward about running off.  And she didn't have to leave until about half an hour after I did.</p>

<p>And I know when I think about it that it's unreasonable to have expected that of MSCZ because the thing that kept him late last night, you know, up until just getting to the theater on time, uhm, I'm sure he had to go in early this morning for.  Probably things that were typed over the night he had to go in and read to make sure they didn't have to be retyped.  And uhm, but that's not the way I react first about it.  (Gurgle, stomach rumble, sniff, 3-minute silence)</p>

<p>You know, I guess I was thinking just simply that I was kind of annoyed at my mother for coming.  And u—, yet, in another way I was pleased.  And, it seems like the annoyance comes out of what I've been saying, I suppose, (inhale) in a different way, but just simply that, you know, sort of that she meant more work for me.  And, you know, she made me do all those extra things.  Not that she literally made me, but that somehow I then get angry at her because she was the cause.  And, uhm even if I chose to do them.  I, it's similar I guess to sometimes when we've had a dinner party and I felt so annoyed afterwards because I felt I worked so hard, you know, cooking certain things, and then, that I could never enjoy the dinner party either because I was still doing too much at the dinner party or just simply that something occurred so that I didn't feel people appreciated the work that went into it.  Maybe they ate less or too quickly, or some—, anyway, somehow that, or just complaining the way that I was too tired by the time the dinner party would be.  I know I've felt this way before.  (Sniff)</p>

<p>ANALYST:   So you do make a martyr of yourself in these situations.  It's just what you're describing.</p>

<p>PATIENT:  Umhmm.</p>

<p>ANALYST:   You're a martyr to your mother.  See how hard you (inhale) try to be a good hostess to her, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, even to your own detriment, and you suffer for it, et cetera.</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (Sniff, sniff, 2-minute silence)  Well, I was thinking of a mixture of 2 things, uhm, because I was just starting to think about at school that I've been kind of going, well, I don't know which way I've been thinking about it.  That, it's the opposite of the way things are at home which I can't seem to get the way I want them to be.  And then at school I'm perhaps driving too hard to have things the way I want them to be.  uhm, being too demanding right at the beginning.  I want to be more clear than I think I was last year over what I accept and what I don't accept.  But, I'm wondering if I'm doing it, you know sort of, using my authority too much, or I don't know, just somehow coming over too strong.  uhm, maybe just like FD.  And then, thinking about at home again and th—, and that situation of what FEN said about LDJ and what I've seen with LDJ and then I think well, is FEN just going to not like anybody I have and find fault or, is there really something?  Or, you know, again, just now knowing what to think, and (sniff, pause)  And mixed in with that is wanting her to be strong with FSO and firm, but loving, or I don't know exactly maybe loving doesn't have to be the word.  But, kind or interested in her anyway, and, uhm, — (Stomach rumble, deep inhale and exhale, 21/2-minute silence)</p>

<p>Because the other, I'm just still thinking about FEN, and the other thing about her which I supposed is mixed in with all this is that she is an extremely direct person, and probably tactless at times.  And, uhm, anyway at other times just extremely direct, uhm, and aggressive.  She's Jewish, and I know I've spoken of her before.  The, last spring when I first talked to her on the telephone I talked about her because I hadn't met her for a long time, uhm, after FSO had been playing with her daughter.  And, she's the one who had such trouble with the director up at school.  So she comes on very strong and then I don't know I just uh, I suppose part of it is too, dealing with her.  And, you know, sort of, well I don't know, I just, I know I find it difficult to deal with somebody so direct.  And so today when she was saying what she did, well, I wanted to know more too about whether or not really something was going on, but I took a very passive role.  And I, I think the most firm thing I said was "Well I had seen nothing to suggest that there'd be any problem and that maybe I hadn't been clear enough in what I had expected from her when she was on the street with FSO" you know with LDJ.  But, other than that I took quite a passive role with her on the phone.  And uhm, maybe this is part of what I'm bothered about and thinking about her and sort of, and how much to discount.  How much is the problem too, that I'm inclined to be passive?  And, uhm, for I suppose it would be passively resistant because I'm not just simply passive, but you know, not say anything directly, but not agree and then feel annoyed behind her back and, and, you know, kind of let it build up inside without being direct about it (clears throat).</p>

<p>ANALYST:   Wo— which is exactly what you're doing with the idea that I brought up at the end of the hour Monday.  You bring it up again, but only really to sort of dismiss it.  And when I mention it again, you ignore it.  It sounds like exactly what you're just describing. Passive resistance. (Chuckles)  Not directly saying you think it's no good or wrong or you know, whatever, but just sort of dropping it, ignoring it.</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (Deep breath, deep breath) No, I know from Monday, you know wh—, the feeling that I had about it Monday which is the only time I really reacted.  Let myself react because it was a surprise somehow, uhm, so I don't know what to think really.  I mean, it just came as a surprise.  And uhm, I guess the closest I've come to thinking about with any kind of acceptance or thinking "Yeah, that really is something I've been doing" is when I've thought about what I had been doing with my mother.  And, because yesterday when I was feeling annoyed, I couldn't, I didn't eve— either it was that I didn't take time to think about it or uhm, I just couldn't think about it in that way.  But it wasn't until today that I could think about it and think "Well I set the whole thing up" or, by not saying anything directly to MSCZ I let the whole thing occur in a way that annoyed me.</p>

<p>And, uhm, so it seems like well, somehow I understood that because I had been thinking about what you said, but yet, uhm, I guess, you know, thinking about it that I've chosen to want to think of my father ha— as having, well, I think I probably have, ruined my life.   Because I know one inclination I've had when I've thought about it here is sort of how do I, you know, this has gone on for so many years just my feelings toward my father.  And he's what he is so that will never change.  How can things change?  So he has ruined my life, and I suppose that really is.  And then I've transferred it to you and then I did the same thing of I won't let go of thi— the feelings and, I keep imagining someday you're going to tell me "This is ridiculous" and "We just have to stop" and uhm — (Pause, sniff)</p>

<p>And I don't know why I would have chosen that  as a way to handle things except that I think all those years that my father was not very pleasant to my mother my mother was very quiet about it.  And so that it was somewhat of a shock, probably not really, because I'm sure we sensed, or I sensed, and, and probably she showed it directly at times too, what lay underneath.  You know, and how strong her feelings could be and how hostile she could feel and how angry, but uhm, for years I saw her not react when my father would behave as he did.  And, so then she would be the martyr.  And that was kind of the view my grandmother had in a way.  You know, I mean about my mother.   Because she, wh— when we were older said some things about, she didn't approve of how my father talks sometimes or treated my mother.  And, uhm, implied that my mother was the martyr.</p>

<p>And I don't know, there's also someth— something that I would just get out of it myself.  You know I was thinking of those times when I used to play around with thinking about suicide.  You know, in a kind of dramatic, silly way and getting back kind of way.  And being a martyr would be the same sort of thing I guess, of, you know, a way to feel as if I'd taken revenge.  (Sniff, stomach rumble, deep breath, silence)</p>

<p>You know, then I guess the next thing I thought was something FYR had said once about me.  uhm, I can't remember the exact words of it, but I was just thinking well, the gist of it was, she had done something that she knew would annoy me and then, in calling.  She had to talk to MSCZ.  I guess MSCZ answered rather mean.  She said something like "I'm glad it's you because FAJ would have reacted this way on the phone."  And it was, you know, sort of not saying anything but being the martyr and really being angry underneath, or something that, I don't know if she used the word "martyr" but, I was just thinking well, there is another way I do it.</p>

<p>And uhm, and then I thought of the situation at school, that uhm, well I suppose there are many times when I do it. I'm just everywhere, but I was thinking of particularly, with the rabbit because this has kind of been on my mind that a lot bothered me last year about the way the rabbit was cared for.  But, uhm, I don't know I said something and then I felt I can't keep saying things and so I tried to do things as much as I could.  But I was annoyed and I suppose feeling the martyr in a way.  And, uhm, this year I haven't really said anything although I might at the first staff meeting.  But, again I can feel the inclination is not to say anything and feel annoyed.  And uhm, you know, sort of I have to suffer people not doing it right kind of thing.  But then I was just thinking that maybe it's just an idiosyncracy on my part that it isn't a matter of it being right or not or more efficient but just I get anno—, one thing that annoys me about it is when people put the papers in for the rabbit in such a way that he tears them all up and churns them all about so i— it just looks like a mess.  And since his, he's usually in my room, I have to look at him and lots of people, you know, see him as being part of my room.  And it offends me personally and then it just is also a way I can be evaluated.  I mean I don't take it that seriously about my being evaluated by him, but still, he's, you know, sort of part of my housekeeping I guess.  And, uhm —</p>

<p>ANALYST:   But you're just stuck with him and there's nothing you can do about it.</p>

<p>PATIENT:  N— Yeah.</p>

<p>ANALYST:   Our time's up.  
??</p>

