<p>*TEXT-PV010019  Friday 18 October 1968    4259 3955  132  172</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT: There were a lot of things on my mind yesterday after I left and one that again came to me right after I left the room so that I, I think I probably consciously tried to remember that it came to my mind, was uhm, in regarding controlling myself.  There've been times that I can't even recall now situations when this happens, but when I just feel there's nothing more I'd like to do than just scream and pro—, probably in a sense throw a tantrum just the way a child might or just somehow, if, if it means going crazy for a while (chuckle) going crazy, or — (pause)</p>

<p>And I think another thing that was on my mind that is all related to uhm, the feeling that I have to feel well, I can't remember exactly how I was talking about it yesterday.  I know I spoke of the girl at camp whose friendship I knew would end or mine for her in any case and, and I just thought I couldn't let go and I couldn't let it gradually die out.  And last night the thing that was bothering me was whether or not I really do love my grandmother or did love her, do I guess still and uhm whether the feeling I had for her in the last few years was more that I could make her happy by visiting her and therefore it was kind, the pleasure that a giver gets in the act of giving and it had nothing to do with feeling for her in itself and uhm —.  But if I'd really loved her perhaps my whole life should somehow be changed in a way that doesn't seem that it's going to be and it just was very disturbing to me and I was talking about it with MSCZ and he made a point which perhaps I'm accepting it because he made it but it does seem to be something that I have always done in trying to make everything absolutely one way or the other.  Because I had to either absolutely have this friendship with this girl and continue it forever and I have to absolutely feel all the time that I'm missing my grandmother terribly and that I loved her and so forth or else I think I didn't.  And just in reactions people on ordinary little things I have to either they have to be a very negative kind of reaction or very positive and I can't accept any nuances or just an indifference.  It's got to be one or the other.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And then last night I began to have this vague feeling of a lot of things that I had to do and I always get that feeling if I'm for some reason suddenly going to be going away, when it wasn't planned ahead.  So I had it last night but if I stop to think now what is it I have to do, I couldn't think of things, maybe one or two, but nothing to create the pressure that I was feeling about all the things I had to do.  And I know last night I didn't sleep that well and it mi—, I'm quite sure it's because of this feeling again and at one point I had a dream about either all the things I had to do or one specific thing and trying to cope with it and do it.  Like I remember the dream when I woke up but by the time I realized that it was connected with just this general feeling of having to do things today, I couldn't remember what the dream had been about.  (Pause)</p>

<p>It's funny with all these things I've been mentioning as I've talked, I've been aware of other associations, thoughts that came just at that moment as I was talking and then when I finished what I was saying and, and went to say what else had just occurred to me they'd slip away again or I feel as if they have.  (Pause) And by the time I got home yesterday I was still feeling sort of upset and when MSCZ saw me he could tell I was and said that I should do myself a favor and let myself cry and again I didn't feel that I really wanted to cry and he asked me something about what had particularly upset you, really essentially what you had asked about what was the image I had of my grandmother that was making me feel that I had to cry.  And again I couldn't talk about it and so then I be—, I did begin to cry and I don't know, I just felt angry at myself even then for crying and it's not exactly as if it was a, I don't exactly know how my feeling was.  I know my feeling here is if I cry it, it's like being a baby, looking like a baby and I don't think it was quite that.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And, and I was saying to MSCZ that if I really felt like I wanted to cry when I was home, I would.  But I can see in a way that's not really true because sometimes when I was alone after I'd heard about my grandmother's death I would almost start to and then I'd stop myself as if well, this was silly, there's no point in doing that.  And I don't know, some of that control I know came from the fact that I would keep telling myself something that my mother had told me and I don't know how she looks upon it but I think I interpreted it as a fact that then we shouldn't show emotion or really feel it because she was very old and had lived a very long time and I think that's part of what is confusing me in how I feel about her.  Because if I begin to accept that she was old enough and had to die then I think well that must mean too that I don't love her if I don't feel anything.  But if I begin to think about what I feel about her dying then I think I'm not accepting life and death, the cycle.  And I again, it's having to have things at one extreme or the other.  And I think part of what was in my mind when I was crying last night even if it were again, something that my mind had there as a trick on me but just simply what good was crying doing so, it was sort of a pointless thing to go through.  (2-minute silence)</p>

<p>I was just thinking it was sort of strange that with all the self control that my family stands for when I was young I don't know if it just came in a certain period, if I always would have a strong temper, but I know that at some point I did have enough of a temper so that I had what might be termed sort of mild temper tantrums and if for any reason I had to be asked to go to my room, my mother would just shut the door and then I could kick or bang or do anything and scream and throw myself on the floor and she left me alone.  But when my grandmother came to live with us, she was extremely disturbed at seeing me having what she thought were te—, temper tantrums or close to a real tantrum and so she was determined not to let me build myself up to that point and would sort of shock me out of it by either hi—, slapping my face or at one point running after me and grabbing me which surprised me for what I thought was a very old lady and she just wouldn't allow me to have them.  (Pause)</p>

<p>But my mother would, and I think too, there were other freedoms that my mother allowed us that my grandmother thought were wrong.  And although I don't know how much she actually stepped in it almost seems like she insisted on more self-control than my mother.  Which in a way I might have interpreted as having more of an interest in me.  But then it makes you wonder if the extreme desire to have control over myself comes more from her influence.  But I, whatever influence it came from I blame my mother and my father for it and I blame them I think in a way not just think it came from them, I think I attach a certain blame because again I think I look at things from my parents as either being at the extreme of good things or bad things and not just neutral.  And the whole attitude I've had toward being here has been that either I'll end up blaming them so much for so many things that I might discover disturb me that came through their influences that I won't want to have anything to do with them or else I'll end up just being independent enough so I don't need them at all and won't feel anything for them.  And somehow I can't quite work myself to see that I could be independent of them and, and realize that certain things came through no fault of theirs but because of things they did and yet still feel an affection for them.</p>

<p>Or just last night at the course I'm taking uhm, we have to do a lot of creating with the materials that we're talking about and the professor goes around and comments about different ones and is trying to help you to see how much further you can carry them and he didn't say anything about any of the things that I did last night.  And it might have been just that he didn't really notice but I immediately interpreted it as he didn't like them and therefore didn't want to be in the position to have to be commenting on them in any way whatsoever, so he avoided saying anything to me and that's really the only way I found I could look at it.  Although I know from a teacher's point of view that you can, although it seems like your seeing things, really not have seen it, and pass over something.  (2-minute silence)</p>

<p>ANALYST: The impression that may be in a certain way you saw something or you said something a while ago here that you sort of passed over without realizing what you'd said.  I'm referring to your comment that when you think back on it actually your mother let you have tantrums and left you alone during them.  But it was your grandmother who was troubled by them.  And that your feeling is that you blame your mother for not wanting to, or I mean for this idea that you should control yourself.</p>

<p>PATIENT: By not realizing, are you suggesting that I might have another reaction to being left alone?  That I don't really —.</p>

<p>ANALYST: No I was meaning it uhm, you said this and then sort of there it is.  I mean, even though you said that you felt your grandmother was the one who didn't like you to have tantrums and wanted you to control yourself, that your mother didn't, you feel you attribute to your mother the demand that you control yourself.  You said it and then you sort of passed over it, as though it were something you saw but didn't see.</p>

<p>PATIENT: I suppose that's (chuckle) true, but I still, I, it's a habit to think that it came from my parents and, and I don't know, anyway, it just in so many ways it didn't seem then that my grandmother was that important a figure in my life.  And I've always idolized her to a certain extent, so that she has to be all good.  Because I know once that when MSCZ was suggesting that perhaps a lot of my problems came from my mother, still hers had to come from somewhere and part of that would have been my grandmother and I just thought, oh no, not her she's so perfect and I really have built her up.  Again, I have to something's either got to be all black or all white and she's the good one and my mother is the bad one.  And even at one point MSCZ made some comment that she, that he thought my father was, if I knew more about things that or if I could recall more about feelings and associations and so I would find my father figured a lot and I was surprised when he said that because again I thought, oh no it's my mother and it was my mother all through high school that I, whenever I did get into the family, in, in any, when it was together, my mother was the one I was always harshest to and most unpleasant with and I could bring myself to bring pleasant for a short time with other members but I couldn't even begin to with my mother no matter how much before I got back together with her I would resolve that I was going to be nice to her this time.  And I think I must have always been hard on her because I know at one point, well, now I don't know whether I made this up, but at one point I went to my grandmother's for a while and I, it seems to me that later my mother told me that I had just been so trying she had to send me to my grandmother and another time, I do know this happened, that I was having a fight with my mother and I threatened to go out of the house and run away or just walk out and keep going and my mother in effect took the threat and said alright go ahead, which I did and then my father came out all upset, saying that my mother hadn't really meant that, but there was this thing between us all the time.  There must have been.  And I know now I look upon my grandmother's interest in my not having tantrums as, as a greater feeling for me although it may not have been this.  It might have just been her a—, attitude toward children, children shouldn't have tantrums.  Because I know sometimes I would think in response to that or even say to her well, if you don't get it out of your system then you contain it within you so it's better to let it out and she would say no you just keep yourself going and I know she was partly feeling this way because she was so upset that my father never controlled his temper with her daughter and this was very disturbing to her.  But even though I'm talking about it now, I still feel that my mother was basically the one to put the responsibility on for any feeling of self-control I now have because she's such an example of it if nothing else.  And the little things she'll say, just as an example when she called me about my grandmother I knew immediately that that was why she was calling and I didn't feel particularly that I was going to not be able to control myself on the phone and I don't know then at one point I just suddenly felt I was go—, about to cry and I know my voice began to break or whatever and she just then said knowing this, that you have to accept it and, and it's for the best, she lived a long time and if people didn't die then the world would be just full of a lot of old crocks, I think she said, and suggesting that first of all I shouldn't have this feeling and secondly if you have it you should control it because that's the way it is.  And this is just an example of all the little times she's interjected this theory of self-control whenever there's a time when I might not have.  But yet when I, when I heard from MEIN, the CHN boy that he really thought things should end and I just couldn't accept it and I was extremely upset.  My mother came out to see me because she could tell how upset I was and I just seemed to have lost all my self-control for a while after that happened and she very patiently stayed with me and let me talk and cry and do anything for an awful long time.  And I remember being kind of surprised that first that she'd come out and then how patient she'd been.  And after that I started well, there weren't too many times when I would have gone to her again, it that was just after I started dating tn the fellow at RZG, bef—, MSCZ's roommate.  I uhm think at one point when I realized in the winter that probably things weren't ever going to get anywhere and that I should probably start facing up, I should just break things off, I remember speaking to her then and she was extremely nice to me about it, not just sort of, oh Lord not again or well, you have to control yourself, or anything.  I mean, she really, was, seemed truly sympathetic and just interested in whatever I might want to say about it.  So again it seems almost like the extremes.  Again, I have to either be blaming my mother and feeling she's responsible and being hateful to her, or feeling that she's very sympathetic and feeling very close to her.  And I was just thinking that at all the times I get upset when my family is together at the dinner table, having a conversation, because this is usually when it occurs, that I get upset, it's my mother not paying attention to me or not seeming to want to hear me that I get upset at.  It's not my father's not listening.  Because I sort of accept that he's not going to listen or that if he's got an idea in his mind and he's letting it out, he's not going to hear anybody else's or that other times if he's busy he's absent minded.  And I somehow accept his lack of interest and it's my mother's that is upsetting to me.  And it's my mother's being busy with committees and things like that when we were younger that I found so upsetting and I've blamed her so much for not being at home when I thought she should be.  Whereas my father was away a lot and I don't have any feeling that I'm conscious of now one way or another about that.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And another attitude, I don't know why this came to my mind, but it just did, and it was something that MSCZ and I talked about because it disturbed me when my mother spoke of it this way.  When we saw them last weekend she just said something about how it's been an awful fall or we, because nothing is settled.  And she kind of put it this way and then well what wasn't settled.  Well my sister, she doesn't know whether she's married yet or not so that's not settled and sort of you can cross it off the list and then uhm, my brother l isn't yet sure which, where he's going to be serving whether he'll get into the, I think it's the national guard he's trying to get into right now, and so that's not settled.  And my grandmother was still alive but ill enough so that she could die any day, so that wasn't settled and she just complained that she was having to live life day to day, day by day.  And I don't know, almost as if these were little chores and jobs and things that she could check off having done.  Which makes me think of all the lists I keep making up, all the things I keep wanting to check off that I've done.  And how I've so often longed to be able to just live life day to day and so what if I don't get something done or I can do it again, or what does it matter anyway and the whole feeling of not having to have things all planned out exactly.  That I'd like to feel free not to at times, and I know she's, she can't either.  And I think, sh—, this feeling of, like sometimes now I can go away suddenly while this weekend there was no question but I would but it still upsets me very much to go away suddenly and I know this whole thing must come from an attitude about sudden change of plans that she has.  Because I used to think that it would be so nice to have a family that you could, people would just be coming and going unexpectedly, instead of having to plan it all out so carefully.  Just stopping in for dinner and sometimes you wouldn't know whether you'd have 5 or 10 for dinner and that kind of a free flow of people in and out of the house, that I don't think she could ever have, I think maybe I'd just read "To the light house"  or something, and then I thought gee that's sounds so great and anyway</p>

<p>The other thing I can recall when I was living at home was every vacation, the first day of every vacation or every weekend it would seem like she'd get the family all together at breakfast and then she'd say alright, now lets make our plans and we'd have to, we'd sit there for hours mulling over these things, having to chart everything out and not just sort of let things happen.  Or if she went shopping and I had, I'd have the same reaction sometimes and had bought food because she had a certain number of people in mind and then there was a change she would get very belligerent and defensive about well, this is what I have, they'll just have to make do if they come or, I don't know, somehow it's not the freedom there and the sort of feeling oh well, it'll be fun to see what we can make of it, but kind of well, they'll just have to take what they can get.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I was just thinking back to that time when I did go to my grandmother's and I'm just curious now to know whether I got the impression somehow that I was sent there because my mother couldn't stand me anymore and had to get away from me for a while, or me away from her, or whether she actually told me this later.  And also I can't remember how old I was.  Because I never think of any real problems and family tensions and things that were terribly upsetting to me until oh, probably when I was in my teens.  And yet I think this trip to my grandmother must have been a lot earlier than that.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And this makes me think of my grandfather, my mother's father.  How people always in the family always speak of warmly as being this great person and such a wonderful story teller.  (Clears throat) When I knew him he was already pretty deaf and he, he was quite a heavy set type of person and had a big bushy mustache and just somehow terrified me whenever I saw him and I don't know whether it's because he spoke loudly because he couldn't hear and you had to scream at him and, or just what, but he didn't have too much patience and my mother says now that he was quite different by the time we would have known him, but uhm all I can, the image that I have of him practically always is one day I was playing in one of the living rooms and, because they had a house that could be one house divided or into two separate houses in effect, and uhm, I must have had something that I threw that knocked a thing that they had hanging in the window, and he came in, I uh, it either disturbed him or else he'd seen it and thought it was going to break and it seems to me he started shouting at me, I don't know if he really did, but I know I was just terrified when he came stomping in.  Yes, it's practically the only image I have of him that really is a clear one.  And everything else about —</p>

<p>(At this point in the recording the power went off, the light, the room went dark and the tape recorder stopped.  It is built in such a way that it cannot be reset except manually so the rest of the recording, which was about 3 or 4 minutes of the hour was lost.  The subject discussed of course, was the patient's reaction to the dark room.  She said it terrified her.  The lights went on briefly and then went off a second time and during this time I asked her what she was terrified of.  Her central feeling was that the walls of the room might just cave in, crumble — anything might happen.)</p>
