<p>*TEXT-PV010372  21 July 1970</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (5-minute silence)  I was thinking about, uhm, some feelings and thoughts that were on my mind today, or I was noticing today, and, uhm.  And, er, I don't know what the connection is exactly but I kept thinking that yesterday I was talking about money and I had thought about money before I came in here and, uhm, I thought about it somewhat after I left, too.  But then I spoke about it with MSCZ.  Just I mentioned that I was getting down so pretty soon we'd have to start our budget or whatever we're going to do, and he just cheerfully said, "Alright.  Fine."  Uhm, I don't know, if he named a day when he'd worked things out.  And it was kind of like he was shouldering the whole thing and it—.  I felt a great sense of relief at that and, and stopped thinking about it from then on.  (clears throat)  At least I put it out of my mind, but I don't—.  I still have the feeling that there's a lot, and I had this feeling yesterday while I was here, too, that there was a lot about it that I wasn't—.  I mean I—, somehow I wasn't getting the whole picture.  I was seeing little parts of it, but I wasn't getting a feeling of the whole thing and how I s_, I don't know, what money means to me and—.  Yet still I did put it out of my mind and—.</p>

<p>Then today—, I don't know whether it was because I was writing letters that I was aware of this, but I kept thinking about well 2 things.  One I've been aware of before.  I was aware of it on Sunday when we were visiting MSCZ's family and, uhm, I think it was mainly when his sister-in-law was there.  And she was talking about equipment for babies and just various things about baby care and so forth.  And I, I was finding I really wasn't interested and I didn't—, and it—.  And it was more because I didn't want to think about that time when I would be having a baby.  I mean that when the baby would actually be there.  And it was as if it didn't concern me or something.  But it was—, I mean it was a real resistance.  It wa—, it wasn't just 'well, it's not a subject that interests me.  I'm just going to go buy a crib and I don't want to talk about it.'  It was something else.</p>

<p>And then today when I was writing, I was noticing, too, because I have generally now, if I'm writing to somebody, I would say I'm pregnant.  And again I was finding that maybe because I have this idea that you're supposed to be so delighted that you're pregnant and, and write that way and make it sound like this is the most wonderful thing that's ever happened to you, and I couldn't do that and—.  And it was be—, It was partly because of this I couldn't—, well, I don't know how to put it exactly.  But it had something to do with wanting to stay—, well, I've said it before in this period of waiting and, and not having a baby and—.  I don't know, all connected with wondering what I'll become or do with myself once the baby's there and—.  I don't know, I was feeling kind of confused and then—.  But then I could think about having the baby in isolated ways that I thought I would enjoy it, and—, like watching—, I don't know and little things, watching it change and develop and—.  So it was—, I was just feeling very confused but there was something about, on the one hand not wanting to think about the baby as anything except, almost non-existent, except sort of there.</p>

<p>And then also thinking about this period as some kind of waiting period and that I don't—. I don't know.  It's almost as if when I have the baby, boom, I have to make the decision about what I'm going to do with myself, and now I don't have to.  And I can keep—, now I can keep doing things that I know if I kept doing them all my life I would not be happy, but that they are sort of a relief.  My little routines and the way I spend the day and stuff like that.  But never really thinking about how I really want to spend my time and—.  And it—, I guess it wasn't until I got here that I was, I was realizing that I'm just sort of waiting, either for some revelation to come to me about what I want to do.  Or it's kind of as if I have set the deadline of when I have the baby, then I'll have to make a decision.  Then I'll know how my life is shaping.  Yet it could—, I mean it could shape a way I wouldn't want.  I can see that now.  And I was sort of wondering, well, why do I feel now I don't have to start? I don't know how to put it, because it—, because then it—, it isn't what I really want to do.  But n_ it's my reaction to this kind of a situation is to figure what way (laughs) I want to spend my time best.  And, and that sort of means to me that, I don't know, then I'll decide what's most worthwhile or something which is what I've always done and (sniff) won't necessarily be making a decision what I want to do.  (pause)</p>

<p>I don't feel I'm being very clear.  I guess the main feeling that ran through everything—, it ran through, uhm, thinking about the money yesterday—, was that I didn't want to face things.  Somehow there's something—.  Well, when I think about the money ge—, I mean after I say that I think, well, how can it be, but somehow there's something about hiding and not facing things in this feeling.  (2-minute silence)</p>

<p>I'm not sure why I didn't say this, but when I was thinking of using the word hiding, to describe this feeling.  I mean it bo—, it both seemed to me as if having the money, it's like building it up in a pile, and I'm hiding behind it, and I'm hiding behind—, I hadn't thought of this, but just using that word, a "pile", made me think of piles of things I'm always talking about.  I'm hiding behind those, but what I next thought of that I didn't say was it's just like the way I use reading.  I've often used it as a word "escaping."  But I don't know, it struck me that I'm sort of hiding behind a book, too.  It keeps me inside, away from people, so in a sense I'm hiding and—.  And then I just thought of the fact that when I did go out to today to do some things that aren't, I don't know, a normal routine of what I do and therefore are—,  sometimes are things I would hesitate doing just because they're not—.  There's nothing frightening about them, except they're not in the normal routine and—.  I—, and it made me feel freer somehow, after I'd done them, because I'd done this things that weren't in the normal routine.</p>

<p>And what I was thinking of particularly was the fact that I went into a new store in the neighborhood today, and it's a store that there aren't a lot of people going in.  And I've always felt extremely uncomfortable going into a new place, because I've—, I've ne—, I guess I just think I don't know what to do wi— pe—.  They'll all descend on me saying, "Can we help you."  And I'm not sure, s_.  Often I just want to see what the store is like, and—.  Today I wanted to get something.  This—, it was a health food store, and, uhm, I guess part of what I was afraid of is that there'd be a kind of person in there that I'm not accustomed to being around.  And I don't know how to explain that, but you might understand what I mean, I don't know, but just that certain people are very carried away with this health food question and I—.  I think there's a lot that's good in it, but I'm not—,I don't know, like some people are, and I was just afraid that there'd be all these people that I didn't understand in there and—.  I mean a_ again it's like going into a group of people I don't know.  And not having and idea what the formula is in dealing with them.  I guess that's part of it, and— (sniff).</p>

<p>But then I get—, I don't know what I was thinking exactly because I ha—, I wanted to get a salt substitute if they had anything that would work that way and—.  Or I didn't know.  I knew there was something called UDJ and I didn't know what was in it.  And so I—, when I went in and there were 3 people in there and as—, I think all three were people who worked in the store, and then nobody else, but at least I had something that I specifically wanted so it made it easier.  If I hadn't I guess I probably wouldn't have gone in let—, until I did.  But anyway then the person who waited on me was very nice and I felt very relaxed. And I was just thinking it was kind of silly of me to have felt so hesitant about going in.  But also it's a thing of—, I've—, since it's opened, and I don't remember how long it's been open now, but well, at least a month, probably longer, I've been wanting to go in there, because I've been curious about it and their—, just wondering what kinds of things they had, but I've been afraid, too.  And it wasn't until yesterday when my doc—, Dr BBB said I should cut out as much salt as I could, or cut it out altogether.  He was kind of—.  Well, I think he knows how hard it is, so he didn't—, he was just saying 'do without salt if you can,' that kind of thing and—.  So it gave me the excuse to go in there that before that time I hadn't thought of.</p>

<p>But it's always after something like that that I'll feel good about it.  But then it doesn't carry over.  The next time there's a new store, I won't think, "Well, the last time I went to new store nothing happened.  It was fine."  I'll still be afraid, and— (clears throat).  I don't know, just the feeling I had today.  If it hadn't been such a nice day out, I might have found reason not to go out until I came here, even with these things that I had to do.  I would have decided I didn't have to do them, or I could put them off or something.  (pause)</p>

<p>And I was just thinking.  This is odd, too, because I mean it was just, once again, part of how I react always but—.  I mean a few times I'll call somebody spontaneously, or think that I want to call them and then I can't do it right at that time, and then I'll do it later without a lot of hesitation.  But generally I keep putting it off until—, if I'm still going to want to do it, I absolutely have to do it at that time.  And I was thinking that, uhm, I have been planning on, uhm, because FHYZ and I talked about this before when we've spoken over the phone.  She's called me, though.  Uhm, that the next time I go into PTT I'd call her and see if we couldn't get together for lunch.  Well, I'd already mentioned that I was going in yesterday, and, uh, she hadn't reacted particularly.  And I had quite a lot to do, and I knew I'd be tired at the end of it, so I didn't really push seeing her then.  But I've also been planning to go in again sometime this week.  And so I was thinking today I'd call her and see when she could meet me for lunch.  But then somehow, I don't know what it was, except there was something about I might get into a long conversation with her, which I always enjoy.  I've never not enjoyed a long conversation with her, but yet still the thought of it, that it wouldn't be just a little brief business call, put me off from calling.  And I kept thinking, "Well, I'll do it later."  And I s_, I'm still procrastinating. (pause)</p>

<p>And, uh, I mean is—, well I guess—, I can't—, I know I feel this way.  It's all part of this feeling of sort of hiding away from things, but I can't understand why I would.  And then I well maybe it's because I have to make an effort to call her.  But in a way it's taking more effort to do what I'm doing, because I keep thinking of calling her and then putting it off.  And I—, I don't know, this—, "emotional turmoil" is too strong a word to use for what I go through each time I do that, but yet it take— (laughs) I don—.  Somehow there's effort involved in putting it off.  Well, I guess it's part of ther—.  With anything there is, because then it keeps coming to my mind, and I keep—, well sometimes even feeling guilty if it's connected with things like writing letters and I've waited too long. And so then I'm beginning to feel guilty that I haven't answered letters.  That would be it.  But with anything, when it starts coming to my mind as something I want to be sure to do, it's so much easier to just do it instead of saying, "Well, I'll do it later."</p>

<p>In fact I think what I did this morning was, I also, uhm—.  Well, I had several calls that I've been thinking of making, and one was to FHYZ and one was to the vet about boarding the cats, which I've been putting off.  Because every time I think of it, I'd conveniently think of it at the time when I couldn't call the vet.  And then, uhm, well, one was to the KCN, because I have some things I want to give them, and I don't know, there might even be more if I_.  I think one was to a girl who was going to have a baby.  The one I spoke of meeting one day and—, at home, and, uhm, thinking I wanted to call her and have her over.  Well, then she had said something about going in that Friday, have her baby, because she's having it by Caesarean.  And I keep putting it off, and my rationalization is, "Well, what if things didn't go right,"  because her second baby was not right.  So that's my excuse for not calling.  But in any case, I decided today I'd call FHYZ and the vet definitely.  And then what I did is, I had—.  The vet I had to call.  I couldn't keep putting it off, so I  sort—, it was like making a deal with myself that I—, I'd done one call so I could excuse myself from doing the other one right away.  (pause)</p>

<p>It just struck me.  I can't really think of enough specifics to know, but it was s_ something about this that struck me.  If I were just calling FHYZ to find out how she was, and I'd really thought I want to call her—, it had nothing to do with getting together with her, I don't think I would have hesitated so much.  I'm not sure though.  Because generally it wouldn't occur to me just to call somebody and find out how they are.  Generally it's—, I ha—, I'm getting to the point where I'll think, "Well, I haven't seen them for so long I really should call and suggest getting together."  And—, but I don't know.  It seems to me that there's something about the fact that I was going to initiate something.  (pause)</p>

<p>And it's get so—, I don't know whether it's because I procrastinate or what, but I find that it's easier to wait or it's easier not even to think of it until the last minute.  And then—, anyway I find it's always easier for me to call to initiate something when it's going to be for that night or that day, than it is to do it ahead of time.  And then the only thing I can think of there is, then if I'm refused, I can think, "Well I asked at such a last minute. No wonder."  But then when I think of this thing with FHYZ, I know she wants to do it, and so I can't imagine I'm afraid of a refusal.  The only thing I can think of is that she might not be able to do it the day I want to do it.  So that then I'll have to change my plans and—.  (pause)</p>

<p>And it does seem to be part of it, because I—, it just makes me think of how, not always, but—.  I sort of vaguely, now that I'm not working like to map out the week, and kind of general things that I might want to be doing and what days I'll do what things and—.  Even if they can be changed around or not done at all or if it isn't really going to be that crucial that they're not done or whatever, I find I get very rigid about it, once I've sort of mapped things out in my mind for the week.  (pause)</p>

<p> And then it just strikes me there's something about hiding in that, too.  There's something about not being myself.  I'm holding myself to something and it's security again, in some way and—.  (pause)</p>

<p>And when I say somehow it keeps me—, I'm hiding and then I'm not being myself, is that it, it—.  Well, it keeps me from being able to, from having to and—.  And the only phrase that I think of for that is that I don't wake up in the morning thinking, "What do I feel like doing today?"  I don't wake up thinking, "I feel like spontaneously calling somebody and doing some special thing," whether it's going to the beach, going to a museum, or anything like that.  Anything like that I plan ahead on.  (pause)</p>

<p>About the only time now that I ask myself really what I feel like doing—.  I mean if I ever ask myself what I feel like doing, if I feel like procrastinating what I've already mapped out that I might do, or sometimes when I haven't mapped out.  But I know here the day's beginning, and there are things that have been in the back of my mind that should be done, and I might feel like procrastinating and not doing anything.  Again it's a question of what's worthwhile.  And what I will feel like doing that is, in my mind, not worthwhile is reading.  And it's the only thing I can think of that I'll want to do if I'm just asking myself, "What do I want to do?"  Except on weekends when MSCZ's with me and so it's not my total responsibility, to think of what I want to do.  Then sometimes I know what I want to do, but yet there's already a structure there, because part of that structure is that on the weekend we get out.  We don't stay at home.  I mean we might stay at home part of the time, but the things we're thinking of that we want to do are things outside of the home generally.  And anyway, I'm doing them with MSCZ, and I might want to do something and say it, but yet he has to agree.  And somehow the total responsibility is not on me and I—, it makes a difference.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  Let me just, uhm, remind you of some of the things you've been dwelling on yesterday and today.  It seems to me the, uh, the one very central thing has been what you've been describing about your attitude toward being pregnant and having a baby.  As you say it's, it's this period now when you don't have the baby but you have it inside, you're pregnant.  It's as though you want to keep that, and you don't want to think of anything that disrupts that.  Second thing is that you say in many different ways that you want very much and do apparently a lot, sort of stay at home and read.  The third thing you made the point about in regard to the money was again that you're hiding something.  That the money represents something very valuable to you, that if I know about it, I'm going to want to take it away from you.  So you better hide it and keep it secret.  So whatever else it means clearly it has something to do with keeping something secret, and keeping it, having it, almost like the way you seem to feel about having the baby inside you.  And then you talked about going to the store.  And the thing that seems to me you emphasize about that is being very curious to see something that you're afraid to see, to go into a place where you shouldn't be, you feel.  Now I think all of these things that I've pointed out that you have been saying, must be connected in some way.  Must be the clues to indicate what's going on.  (pause)</p>

<p>PATIENT:  Well, three of the things as you were describing them, made me think of one thing in particular, or not exactly one thing, but sort of a central thing anyway.  And I'm not sure the reading part—, I'm not sure how it fits in exactly except it's an esc—, I always feel it's an escape, but (sniff) what—, well what made me start thinking about this one thing was when you were describing the money, and my reaction to it.  And I hadn't thought of this yesterday, but today wh—, as you were saying that I'm using it—.  Well, I think you said it somewhat different.  I felt I was hiding behind it, but you described it as it's hiding something, that I don't want you to see.  And at first it reminded me how I didn't want you know amounts yesterday.</p>

<p>But then I immediately thought of a penis first from the way you were describing it.  And the feeling I've talked about before here of trying to get one and then hide—.  Well I thought of that toy and hiding the fact that I'd even played with the toy and pretended I'd had one.  And I thought of my father and the fact that somehow I think money means masculinity to me, just like I was thinking yesterday money meant independence to me, but independence in a way like working had meant to me.  And it's, it's got a masculine characteristic in my mind, or it means something masculine.  And somehow today when you were talking it seemed to mean that I had a penis and I was hiding—, the money was hiding that if I got too specific.  But yet that's what it meant and if I talked about it too much, you'd know.  

And going into the store made me think of—, the way you were describing it go—, my parents bedroom looking at a penis, seeing a penis that I want to see and was afraid of seeing or curious to see my father's but afraid of seeing.  And feeling not—, that I didn't belong in his bedroom.  (pause)</p>

<p>Now I can't remember what you were—.  Oh, yeah, being pregnant and what—, just reminded me again of before when I definitely had the feeling that being pregnant somehow—, well it was another way to have a penis.  I mean again it just seemed like some of the things that I was thinking—.  It was thinking back to other things I've said here, and it didn't—.  I wasn't really recalling the feeling about it.  I mean the feeling that this is what it is came with the money and the store.  Well, another phrase that, eh, eh, occurred to me—, I don't know if I mentioned it yesterday, but I think of it now and I think it has occurred to me before when I was thinking well, what does money mean to me.  And I keep thinking, if I have it, it means I'm alright.  And at first I was thinking of it only in terms of security.  It means I'm alright.  I'm safe.  But also now I can think of it another way.  I'd be safe also for this reason.  It means I'm alright, there's nothing wrong with me.  (pause)</p>

<p>And another thing.  I don't think in describing how I felt about going into a new store, like this one today, and it's true of going into a room where there are—.  I mean it doesn't even have to be a room I've never been in before.  It can just be a room I haven't entered that day.  Or it could be a room I haven't entered that day be—, with those particular people in it.  And I—, then I can—, I'm thinking of the faculty room at school when I describe it in that sense, but—.  In all these cases, it's a feeling of not only going in there and feeling I might not belong, but it's more than that.  It's a feeling that everyone will know I don't belong, and that I'll—, it'll be made obvious that I don't belong.  They won't just be passive about the fact that I've come in.  It'll be active that they might mock me, by what they do, make fun of me, tell me I don't belong or I don't know, somehow take an active part in making it very clear I don't.  Or just like my father shouting, "Don't come in!  Don't come in!"  (silence)</p>

<p> I don't know why I think of this except that I'm—, ma—, just speaking about the store keeps making me visualize this thing about my father's bedroom, my parents' bedroom, but it was always my father's voice.  Is the thing I think of is that as I got older, he became more casual about my coming in, until it—, until I guess I don't know wh—, I don't know how old I was then but—.  I m_ I think of maybe the period starting when I went to college or something.  But in any case, I was definitely quite a bit older, he'd even let me come in when he had his underwear on, and I keep thinking, "This is a mistake.  I'm not supposed to be here.  What's the matter with him?  He's not telling me to get out."  And I—, I don't know, I couldn't understand the—, I don't know, what changed in his attitude.  (pause)</p>

<p>And I, and I guess at that point it was also—, I think maybe I was still aware of a curiosity, but also where I wasn't supposed to have that curiosity after all those years of training.  And it was very distressing for me to be there.  I wished that he had told me to get out, or told me not to come so I wasn't in this situation of being in the room with him when he was half undressed.  When before, when I was smaller her wouldn't let me in the room unless he had on his trousers.  He might not have on a shirt, but he would at least have on trousers and—.  (pause)</p>

<p>And I just think of something else, too, that—.  Usually I've thought of this only in terms of MLWZ, and MLWZ's having something that I wanted and thinking of it because MLWZ was favored or I don't know, somehow anyway connecting it with the reaction MLWZ had gotten from the family and then well thinking I wanted whatever MLWZ had that made him get this reaction.  But just now I was thinking, that my father had this penis that I wanted.  And connecting it somehow with this whole thing of money and my confusion over my feeling toward my father's money that I feel is so important and that I've wanted.  And that I haven't—, and yet that I haven't wanted to know a lot about.  Just like wanting his penis or at least wanting to see it, and yet not wanting to see it, not wanting to know about it.(pause)</p>

<p>But then I'm not sure how I wanted his penis.  I keep thinking did I want it, because then it would make me s_, then I'd have one.  It would make me something I wanted to be, that I wasn't.  Or did I want it in the sexual sense, that I was a female receiving it from my father and that I had sexual feelings toward him, and I don't know. (pause)</p>

<p>And then the way I think of the reading is that, if I'm in my room reading, I'm safe from playing games I shouldn't, thinking thoughts I shouldn't, in fact safe from thinking thoughts I don't like, whether or not I shouldn't, that just make me unhappy and—.  (deep breath).(pause)</p>

<p>I never thought of this, but you know, I was just thinking about my room at the house that I would always mean if I said at home when I was growing up. 

 Uhm, the one that I moved into when I had my own room.  And the associations with it were that it was once MLWZ's room as a nursery, and then it became my room.  My father's library was underneath, and then it was just my room over the library.  And it was part of the attic on top, but it was a tower.  It was—, this was one of those Victorian houses that had those towers.  I don't know if you know exactly what I mean, but I was just thinking of it now is it blended in with the house more than some did.  But I was thinking of it being cut off from the house, because of that round shape and being separate from it, which I liked.  And then I was thinking that well, being a round shape like that it—, somehow it took on, because of maybe what I was just talking about, associations with a penis.  And then it did always give me, it seems to me, a pleasure to think that underneath was my father's library.</p>

<p>ANALYST:  Well, our time's up.</p>