<p>*TEXT-WF090398   Wednesday 7 October 1970    4282 4179   53   50</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (3 ½-minute silence) It seems like a number of things are fitting together.  Uh, because I, I don't know, a lot of things come to my mind all at once.  And (clears throat) they all seem to have something to do with the fact that — I was just thinking that after yesterday I didn't consciously think any more about what I talked about here yesterday.  And yet somehow I have this feeling that what I talked about here was very much on my mind, or aspects of it.  (Clears throat) All, I mean one thing that makes me think that is that last night was unusually bad for having dreams and waking up and feeling distressed at the dreams I was having and then going back to sleep and having another one and waking up and their being somewhat different.  But not, now I can't, I don't even think in the morning I could recall the dreams although maybe right when I woke up from them I could.  The only thing that I think of is that some of the dreaming I did was all about looking for an apartment.</p>

<p>And that made me think that well, I don't know, it's not only last night, it's since we've been looking, but last night was typical too.  I get very intense at home about finding something.  During the day when I'm out looking I don't feel so intense because I'm doing something about it and I don't, but I'm not sure that's exactly why I don't.  But then when MSCZ gets home I get very intense over it.  And uh, the thought came to me just now in a way that I don't think it ever has before that uhm, somehow the intensity that I'm putting into looking for an apartment or, or trying to figure out what we're going to do about where we live next is sort of misplaced or,or unreal or I don't know, too, it's more than what I really feel about looking for an apartment.  And it's sort of an excuse or a way to divert this.  I mean, if I don't put this intensity there, I'll put it somewhere else where I don't want to or something like that.</p>

<p>And then I was just thinking that uhm, I was remembering today mainly because tomorrow I go, (clears throat) I might, I have my first class in this lamaze method tomorrow night.  And so that, when I was thinking about it today, I was thinking sort of well, I'm getting kind of nervous about the fact that pretty soon my date will come for delivery.  And yet when I was thinking about it just now here, again it seemed like I'm not really nervous.  I mean, there are still certain things I'm not confident about but I've made the decision on what I think is the best thing for me to do so I'll feel best about it.  And, I don't know, it, it seems like it's only when I need to ha—, express intense feelings in a certain way that I'll direct them toward being worried about childbirth.  And I'm not, I'm not sure that I'm that worried.  I, I don't know, I mean maybe when the day comes I'll be worried.  But somehow well, at least today in any case, I felt as if I were putting it on in some way or, it wasn't really the feeling that I had.  And — and, it just reminds me of how I will do this about school too.  If, if I'm teaching I, I'll blow up problems there so that they take all my mark and also, I was just thinking that last night energies and time.  Too, and,and this was true the night before, that uhm, after I'd done anything that I wanted to do, like doing the dishes and all, I couldn't really settle down.  I didn't really, I don't know, it was, it was an odd thing.  I mean I still have some work I have to correct,left over from when I was teaching because I had the tests to do.  And then I'll have papers because I told FYR I'd correct a set of papers that were going to be turned in after she returned.  Uhm, but I didn't really feel like doing those except that would be the kind of thing that I could have settled down to do last night or the night before.  But I didn't want to read a book or, I don't know, there are some books that I have now that I'd be curious to read.  And I'm, I'm not sure, I mean last night when it was the 2nd night in a row I was feeling this way, I began to wonder,well why don't I want to read a book?  And I mean read something that, that is continuous, that I can't just put down and leave for a long time and pick up again and it won't matter.  And I don't know, it just seems like somehow that that would mean that I wouldn't be directing my energy so much toward something like this apartment hunting.  And if I took them away from that, then I might — I'm speculating I guess, but might — direct them towards something I didn't want to direct them toward.</p>

<p>But then the book — I could, I didn't really want to read this either, but if I wanted to read it's the one I could pick up and read — was the one about "Whatever you've wanted to know about sex."  And it just, I don't know, it makes me ask now why I'd have that reaction.  It's, because I would have thought it would be getting me too close to what I was really trying to get a way from.  But I don't know, somehow it seemed to work the opposite way.  It's — and then it makes me think is it part of this,whenever I intellectualize on anything, I don't find it hard to, well it's not really dealing with it because I am just intellectualizing.  But — (pause) but then if I'm — I mean getting back to thinking that all this has something to do with what I've been talking about here, and if I just take yesterday in particular, I'm not sure I, I mean, I don't feel any strong feeling that it's one particular thing.</p>

<p>(Silence) Well, and I guess what I'm thinking is, I mean, I'm remembering in particular that I talked about being jealous and either feeling like the 3rd person or being jealous of the 3rd person.  And uhm, talking about you in particular and fantasies about you that I've had and why I'd be jealous.  And then I remember,the day before I was talking, or 2 days before, talking about uhm my reaction at MSCZ's family's, which I feel even — we had another call last night and I think I felt even a little bit more guilty about that because we learned that uhm the baby was having an epilep_ epileptic seizure.  That's what actually was gong on.  And I hadn't known that she was an epileptic.  But I mean the fact that something serious really was happening is now definite.  And — well, I think somehow in there I, in these days I've been talking about, well, I don't know, sort of underlying all this I guess are sexual feelings that I have that I find hard to admit.</p>

<p>(2-minute silence) I don't know.  I went from remembering specifically again what was happening when the baby was taken ill, and, or having the seizure and uhm sort of where I was when (clears throat) the different people were being called.  And I don't know, somehow I have this feeling that I wanted to look good but mainly in the eyes of the men who were around, not so much in the eyes of the women.  And in this — and then I would compare myself to FEJ who was being so excited and, and I was trying to be, I think, a great opposite to that in being very calm.</p>

<p>And then I, then I began to think about the uhm particular agent I saw today.  It was a woman and uhm at one point she was talking about an apartment I've seen through another agent that she doesn't think should be shown yet because it's not — this is, we're looking at co-ops now and the building is, has not gone co-op yet.  So she thinks it's premature that it's being shown and with the possibility of being sold and because it in a way isn't really owned.  Uhm, and then she asked me who had sol—, who had shown it to MSCZ and me before and I had already told her I'd seen it.  So I, I, I don't know, I told her who had shown it to me and she began, she didn't say too much because I think she decided it was sort of unprofessional, but she was, she couldn't resist sort of saying, oh, I would've, should've known it would be them, that particular agent.  And, I don't know, it was again — I suppose I thought of it because of the a feeling that she was feeling competitive and had to say something.  Just like I was feeling competitive.  (Pause)</p>

<p>Another thing that comes to my mind is something I, I, I mean there are other things that came to my mind and I, and I kept forgetting this, although it occurred to me uhm, I think, I think a day when I did recall a dream enough to talk about it here.  And, but I've been aware of this other nights too, that uhm, when I wake up from dreams, I have really an antagonistic feeling toward MSCZ.  And one particular night, I'm, I'm not sure if it was the night before last or earlier than that, he even said to me, why are you pushing me out of bed?  And my reaction was well I'm not pushing you out of bed.  But I really was, I mean I was literally, pushing him out or wanting him out.  And I mean, I was feeling ver—, I think very angry toward him then or antagonistic.  And I've kind of had this feeling I mean, I think that was the most extreme.  But I've had this feeling I think other nights where, well I don't know how to describe it any other way, except antagonistic toward him.(Clears throat) And, and it's usually when I'm just waking up.  And usually it's some dream that's caused me to just wake up.</p>

<p>(Pause) And what I think next, I, I don't know if it's just guessing or what it is, but uhm, I think that the reason I might feel that way is because MSCZ is, is representing a man, I mean men.  Not just, it's not MSCZ, or maybe it's MSCZ as an individual too, but I don't know, it seems like it's more his being the representative of his sex.  And the, the dreams all have something to do with sex and something I don't want to be facing and I kind of blame him,being his sex, for that.  I mean if there were no male sex, then I wouldn't be having these feelings that I don't want to admit or don't want to dream about.  (Clears throat)</p>

<p>(Pause) Made me think of another aspect of this apartment business that sometimes comes out in the evening when I'm feeling so intense over finding an apartment, going over what I've seen and making any decisions that are possible to make.  Uhm, and, and what happens is, I get in that ultra uhm organized state and I mean where I'm really running the show and being very efficient with MSCZ,which is, I mean the farthest extreme from feeling any rapport with him I think, in a way — or letting any real feelings out.</p>

<p>(2-minute silence) Because now I'm doing literally what I've been sort of saying has been happening.  Because I find I (clears throat) slipped into thinking about apartments that I saw today, mainly one that is one of the, well, I think we've seen 1 or 2 others too that are pretty much in the same realm.  But this one is certainly within a realm that we could afford and I liked the layout too, except that I mean I like, it's, it's not the layout, I don't like the fact that it's a dark apartment.  And this is what I began to think about.  And then I began to think about another one that I knew of that we haven't looked at because it's too expensive but it's in a building of, uhm, well the BFM's live in that building.  And well, anyway just thinking about all that kind of thing.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I don't know if I should dismiss it like that though, because I think what I was getting into was uhm thinking about FNI.  And after I thought of this other apartment in her building and how she's sort of made her adjustment to the neighborhood and how she lives, and you know, to handle things like baby-sitters from within the building and all.  And I think one thing that has been a question in my mind is (clears throat) uhm how much I'm sort of, well I don't, following her lead isn't exactly it.  What comes to my mind is the comparison between how I'm feeling now with FNI already settled in the neighborhood I'm looking in and how I used to feel when I was growing up and FYC was always 2 years ahead of me wherever I went.  So that certain things weren't unknown to me as long as I followed along.  And I've been wondering if that's sort of what I'm doing because uhm I find I particularly want to be within a certain number of streets on the PDSW, which is generally her area.  And the apartment that I was looking at today is really below that.  It's not that far away, but still it's, it's almost another neighborhood, and I, and I don't know how much that is entering into my thinking,well in a way I don't really want to live there.  And then that, that disturbs me if that's what I'm doing,that limiting myself because I sort of don't want too many unknowns.</p>

<p>(2-minute silence) In fact I'm, I'm getting this feeling, intense feeling too that I was describing.  Because I was thinking MSCZ is going to see 1 or 2 of the apartments or maybe all of them, I'm not sure, that I saw today, uhm, this evening, because 2 of them in particular are really good possibilities for us.  And I, and what I was thinking is, I don't know, getting this feeling I want to know immediately how he's reacting and what can we do about it, sort of question.  And in particular (clears throat) I guess I was thinking about — well there were 2 I saw, one was in excellent condition and the other was in pretty bad.  And the one in bad condition I was wondering if we could get the people to come down in their price at all so that we could afford it.  And, because that particular apartment is, is a very nice one.  I don't know, I still, I have this feeling now and it's what I was describing before too, that I mean, just like taking this one apartment that is right now probably more than we could afford, although it's in not the best shape.  Uhm, I mean I'll suddenly settle on one and say this is where I would be happy living.  I can't be happy anywhere else.  And I've been doing this all along while we've been looking, I'll get just, I mean hysterical isn't the word, but well, very intense over one particular apartment.  And then that'll pass away and I'll choose a new one to feel intense over and yet just the fact I can keep doing it makes me wonder if I'm not trying to convince myself there's only one place where I can be happy when really I could adjust to all sorts of different apartments perfectly well.  But some, seems like for some reason I don't want to admit that.</p>

<p>(Silence) Because I was just thinking, another thing I am finding hard is that uhm all these apartments which MSCZ's seeing tonight, well they're all in one building and they're all in this area a little bit below the area I've generally been thinking of, which is where, you know, sort of the general area where FNI lives and also FYR, so it's — and then some other people we know.  So it's several people we know but those are the main 2 we know the best.  Uhm, and therefore through them I know a lot more about the neighborhood and I don't know, I was just thinking that it's well,sometimes when I've been thinking about moving out of where we live now, I would do so because, it had seemed to me, just one type was living there.  And I didn't, I don't know, somehow I didn't feel really part of it.  And it might have been just because I didn't have children, and the type that was living there were young married couples who were lawyers working in PTL or stockbrokers and who had children.  And maybe I'd feel more part of it now, but I, I don't know, somehow I didn't want to be in this one kind of environment.  And yet what I suspect and it always seemed like the PDSW to me was a much more varied one and it, and I think it probably still is.  But what I'm seeking I think is exactly what I'm leaving in a way.  It's just that I have more friends in, in the PDSW already, or they're closer friends.  And,but really I'm,what I'm looking for is, is an area where people feel the same way and want the same things that I do.</p>

<p>(2-minute silence) Well, I, I was, well the word security came to my mind and,and well that must be partly why I mean, first of all, why I'd look for the people feeling exactly the same way — it's more secure — and why I'd feel this way about just a matter of 10 streets or so on the PDSW, that one area would be more desirable because I already know it better.  I mean, I can list all sorts of things that uhm make it sound like it's a better area, I mean for shopping and parks and stuff like that, but I don't know if it's really true.  Because I don't know anything about — well, the uhm one we're looking at now is in the low PSTH's and the others have been in the very high PSTH's, well mainly the low PSTN's although the BFM's live in the high PSTH's and so, the difference really isn't that great but they are kind of different neighborhoods.  The feeling is different.</p>

<p>But then, then what came to my mind after that word security came to my mind was another thing I began — well, when I was not settling on anything last night I became very intense over — uhm, it was just another aspect of not feeling secure in our building where we are now.  Uhm, I think I mentioned that the ceiling and the parlor floor, which is one of the floors which the landlord has, caved in not too long ago, which was like what happened to us in our dining room about 2 or 3 years ago.  And now our living room is cracking or at least it seems like it's much worse than it's ever been in, in that the cracks are recent.  And it doesn't look like the dining room ceiling did right before it fell in.  But yet immediately I, when MSCZ said, "Well this is really kind of worrying me,"  uhm, but then he didn't want to pursue it because there was nothing he could do right at the moment.  But immediately I hit upon that as uh something else to feel intense about I think, because I immediately thought we have to do something immediately and I could think of good reasons why to be worried.  I mean because when it falls, the ceiling falls in, it's, it's extremely thick.  I don't know if all ceilings are but this particular one is anyway.  And uhm, it broke our dining room table when it fell in.</p>

<p>And so I, I'm worried about whoever might be in the room and I'm worried about the furniture because we have some nice furniture in our living room.  But I don't know if I really think it will happen because it is looking different than the dining room ceiling did.  And I, I don't know, I just kind of have the feeling again that instead of doing something positive, I would just feel intense in worrying about it.  (Pause) And then I, I start thinking,well if I did something positive then I couldn't think about it anymore.  It would be done.</p>

<p>And I mean, I, I, I don't know, I, I guess what comes to my mind next is, I realize how far I've gotten from what I was talking about yesterday or the fact that I was feeling what I was talking about yesterday was underlying a lot of this type of reaction that I've been talking about.</p>

<p>(Pause) That makes me think of how at the end of last time it seemed to me the way I said something made a difference because I'm no—, I'm not sure exactly what I was talking about.  It was something to do with the fantasies I've had about you and you would ask me if I had not said something more about ones I'd had about this girl I'd imagined to be your wife.  And I was talking about that and then I, I can't remember exactly what the context was, but I was saying something in the end about having these sexual fantasies about you.  And I wanted to — when it came to my mind I wanted to put it in an indirect way.  And I can't remember now how the indirect way would be and I'm, I'm not sure exactly what I did say.  But what I did say it seemed to me was saying it more directly, I mean, in other words, admitting my involvement more than if I said it indirectly.  And I'm wondering if that has anything to do with it, because I found it hard to do it.  And so then I would think my reaction would be to immediately run away from the whole thing if, I mean, I wouldn't have run away as long as I was here, but as soon as I could run away.  I should think I would and I could by going home and thinking about all these other things.  (Silence)</p>

<p>I (clears throat) I was just remembering it a little better (clears throat) it seems that as I recall it, the distinction I made was between saying something about having these fantasies about you and saying having these sexual feelings towards you.  And somehow saying having these fantasies doesn't really — I mean it, it is a step from talking about feelings itself, which in turn became the fantasies.  (Pause)</p>

<p>ANALYST:   (Clears throat) I keep uh thinking about uh something else you were saying about to me yesterday when you were describing the way I seemed to you — impersonal, businesslike, forbidding.  And then you said distant, and that seemed the most ominous of all, you said, without explaining it.</p>

<p>PATIENT:  (Pause) I'm not sure exactly what was going on yesterday be_ because uhm, by the time — I think you even had to ask me before I said that, but it had already been in my mind — and by the time I started to say it, it was almost as if I couldn't really get hold of what had been in my mind anymore.</p>

<p>And what, what comes to my mind now, and I'm not sure it's the same thing, is this some, something about I, I guess the limitations that are built into the relationship that we have because I'm here as a patient and you're a doctor.  And we see each other for 1 hour every day under these very particular conditions and somehow that seems to be part of what was so bad with these, well, I was going to say fantasies (chuckle) about you, but with,with these feelings that I've been talking about but still I ki—, I kind of can't admit except saying I've been talking about them.  I don't know, I mean on one level I guess,because I've talked sometimes about being afraid of you in this room, so on one level I guess I'm afraid of our relationship changing.  And yet I'm afraid of it, I think,because I really want it to and it can't, because part of the whole setup of the way I come here is that you are to an extent distant and businesslike and all that.  And I don't know, I guess that's what I, it would seem most ominous that it could never change.  I don't feel I'm saying it very well, but uhm —</p>

<p>ANALYST:   Well, our time's up.</p>