<p>*TEXT-PV010010  Friday 4 October 1968             5490 5446   30   14</p>

<p>______________________________________________________________________________</p>


<p>PATIENT: (2-minute silence) One thing that's most immediately on my mind right now is a reaction to waiting out there when there are a lot of people, especially if they're people for the elevator and I don't I, I suppose I just I'm am thinking that everybody knows why I'm here and it sort of, as if they'd look at me with a certain feeling that I had failed somehow in taking care of myself which I know is an attitude I had about facing that I might be helped by analysis to start with.  But (pause) I, fi—, I feel very funny when there are people around almost as if I have to get a certain bravado and I don't know, pretend I'm not here, (chuckle) or what I am here for or something, I, I just feel very funny if there's anybody (pause).</p>

<p>ANALYST: As though everyone knows what you're here for —</p>

<p>PATIENT: Hmm.</p>

<p>ANALYST: — You say?</p>

<p>PATIENT: Anyway, if I think about it, I, or if I think of myself being in their place, they might, it might cross their mind, but they wouldn't stop and think about it, but if I'm sitting there waiting and seeing them, then I think well they must be just thinking about me, which I realize is probably not true at all.  But even, but still I can't seem to stop that reaction.  I, I don't know I just feel as if I'm sitting way out there and there's no place I can kind of hide in behind or something.  (Pause)</p>

<p>Another thing that uhm, happened just recently and I imagine my reaction is the same as it is to so many things.  Uh, today a boy hurt himself when he was playing outside and I had realized that it, something had happened but he was the kind of child who uhm, always says oh nothing happened, and he, he didn't I couldn't see anything and I didn't really think that there was anything very serious because this has happened with him so often when it was just a bump, and I've generally seen him when he was hurt, but uhm, it turns out that he bit right through his tongue and although I was watching him and I was somewhat aware that he was in distress, and I did ask him what the trouble was, and he wouldn't tell me, I, I feel very responsible for the fact that I didn't know and that again somehow I've failed in what I should be doing.  And, and also that his family would probably hold me responsible for not having found out and I just have a very strong guilt feeling about it.  And my initial reaction was to immediately call his mother and, not to find out how he was, but simply to sort of clear myself.  But I justified calling her, I haven't reached her but I justified trying to get her by telling myself that it would show a concern for the child but I, I know I really was doing it just to try to clear myself from any blame in it.  (Silence)</p>

<p>It's funny too because when I, when I'm dealing with other people I'm sometimes, I, I'm probably very harsh in judging them but still I do accept the fact that everybody is going to be making some mistakes, but I can't seem to feel that way about myself and, and that seems to be one reason why I'm always so defensive.  I somehow just feel I can't ever let a situation arise where I have to admit that I've made a mistake or that other people are really going to say I made a mistake in that particular instance.  And all I could think of is, when I was younger and, and I'm not sure if it were just big things or just anything, in doing things with my father, and he would just say, oh that was a stupid thing to do, in a very strong way, whenever you'd make a mistake.  I especially think of things like if we were helping him move furniture or something, and I think sometimes he probably asked us to do things that—, which was really just too much to ask and might have been so heavy that eventually we'd just loose our grip, and he would just get absolutely furious if you ever did anything like that and he would actually swear at us which was really unlike him to do, I mean he wasn't somebody just running around swearing all the time.  So it made it much stronger when he did do it.  And I don't know how often this happened but it must have affected me quite a bit because when MSCZ and I were first married we had to put our bed together since the men who delivered it were unable to.  And I know that when you're trying to get something together and it's falling apart, you're so frustrated that you're inclined to be a little bit angry at the person who's helping you, but I just, I was just terribly upset at the thought he might even criticize me and I remember at one point I almost felt I couldn't help him because of the fact that something might go wrong and then he'd start screaming at me.  (Pause) And my sis—, my older sister used to scream at me a lot too for just sort of being around.  But I'd always, she'd be in her room and I'd go in it and she'd scream at me and then next time I'd know who was going to do it and I'd still go in there, I don't know why I kept going back.  (Pause; chuckle) I must have looked pretty stupid, because I'd just stand there and she'd ignore me and I'd just keep on (chuckle) standing there, and then, if I made any small noise, she'd scream at me for that.  (Silence)</p>

<p>I was thinking back to the boy today, and, and I just don't know whether I can judge realistically when something like this happens, how, how much I could have done if I'd been perhaps a little more alert and how much was just something that was going to happen and it made me think of a time when I was a child and again, I think this is true, it's something I remember happening.  Uhm, and at one point my teacher, it was, I don't remember if I was at a lesson, like a dancing school lesson or if it were my teacher at school, but in any case I re—, I seem to remember being put in a liked mumps or measles or something.  But I obviously had been doing something and I was put in the closet for discipline and after that I, I know, I've always thought that the teacher should have known and again I can see where you get into these things now that I am a teacher and not know, and I just don't know how much you can know or can't know and I just feel as if I, when I judge myself I just assume I should know if I'm really doing a good job.  And the same thing with my first grade teacher who always raved about, uhm, and I imagine she was good, I don't have any memory of her myself personally, except the one incident when she didn't let me go to the bathroom.  But uhm, oh, I have another memory too.  I had, I was beginning to have bad eyesight and it wasn't until the end of first grade that I had glasses but throughout first grade with all the work you do for reading, uhm, I'd have trouble seeing anything on the board and following directions if it involved that.  And she may have been very gentle with me, I just don't know, but my impression is that she used to be mean to me because of the fact that I wasn't following directions in you know, being impatient or a little bit stricter than she might have been with some.  And I suppose I was just in terror but I'd be doing something wrong and she'd have to point it out.  And I think I've always felt that somehow she should have known that I needed glasses and I think she did.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And another thing that I can see now has come out of the particular method used when I was going through first grade, so forth for reading, which was more of a sight method.  Uhm, I had a lot of trouble hearing words and hearing how they were spoken and knowing how to pronounce them.  If I met a new word all through elementary school I can remember just dying if I had to read the passage and there'd be a word in there I didn't know how to pronounce and I didn't know how to use the dictionary to look up pronunciation but everybody else seemed to and I was afraid to ask, or inquire what someone did, how, how did they know how to pronounce it, just from looking at this thing in the dictionary.  And I just somehow blamed myself and, and thought I was just inferior because I would have this trouble, or I'd be talking and I'd, to my, very much to my family's amusement, I'd use words incorrectly and when I might mean one word I'd say it slightly differently which would be an entirely different word and of course they all though that was terribly funny.  And I just, I might have laughed at it at the time, but it was only because I knew socially I'd better, I'd feel mortified even within my own family that I was doing it.  In fact when I think of how we all were with each other, even with my parents, it seems like well, I don't know exactly how to describe it, but almost a vindictive pleasure in somebody else's some fault somebody else might have made, because then you knew you weren't the one making it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>Something I, that was probably what I would have said next if there'd been more time lost yesterday was the sort of puritanical upbringing that I know my parents had and how I've always kind of been in the middle of uhm, a much more liberal way of thinking for people today, especially younger generations and their idea of things and, and I suppose work and jobs and duty all fall into their idea of what you should be doing and saving money too.  And just somehow I was preparing for the future and not just enjoying the present.  Because I didn't, well, I don't remember doing much of just little family excursions for a day, just to enjoy the present, just because they were enjoying the present and therefore we would too.  If we had any excursions, it was because children like this kind of thing, so today we'll set aside for doing that.  But I never felt that it, and usually was just my mother liked going to the beach during the summer, and even then you never felt my mother was enjoying it.  It was just something that you did with children, because children would enjoy it.  And I, I realized this most fully when I was in PEC and the family there used to just, well, even just sometimes when he, when the man came home from the office, he'd just suddenly say, I feel like driving somewhere, let's all go, and it was just so much fun, the whole feeling of joy in being alive and being outside and I don't know, it was just something totally different than I'd ever had before.  And I think my husband's family is that way to some extent too, that has made me realize it wasn't just being in PEC that caused this, because the PEC climate and countryside can make you feel this way anyway, but it's something more than that.  I think they might have even felt guilty in enjoying it.  And I know that this is some one of the reasons why I could never enjoy just some leisure time.  Because if I did feel I had nothing to do, so I could do what I want, I felt guilty, that I should be doing something that I thought I should be doing.  And I can see just doing little things around the house now that can be done in no time and if MSCZ is there working on something, then I will do it in no time.  But if I'm there alone, and once I get that done there won't be anything on my mind that I have to do, then I just dawdle doing it and just never seem to get it done.  (Pause)</p>

<p>And I suppose their reserve and maybe it's all part of their sort of puritanical way of living, the complete lack of any demonstration of affection for each other or with us made me really question how we were conceived.  Because I just couldn't imagine that they ever got that close to each other.  And I used to be kind of mad sometimes that I looked so much like my mother in particular when I was young, and there was certainly a strong resemblance to my father too, so that I knew I wasn't adopted.  But I used to be really mad because I, I think for a time I wanted to think I was adopted.  Again I think it was out of self pity, but maybe it was partly too because then could think I didn't really belong to them (chuckle) and therefore wouldn't have to be like them, maybe.  (Pause)</p>

<p>In fact, my mother once spoke to me about how you have to be careful.  Once, well, I think this was when I was in college, how a girl has to be careful because in being with a man and uhm, in a situation where you can be feeling quite strongly about each other, you can be surprised at how strongly you feel and, and you might get into a situation you didn't want to.  I can remember just being amazed to, to think she'd ever felt anything.  And I think I always too, I thought in not wanting to get into any trouble, came more from thinking of my father's reaction to it if I did, than to uhm, than, than my actually thinking about the situation and how it might affect me in my life and a boy's life, if he were, you know, whoever it might be that would be involved.  And it was just always this thinking about my father that made me afraid of it and this came partly because his sister, uhm, well the one that's alive, uhm, had an illegitimate child and he was always just terrible to the child, and of course I didn't know at first that she had been illegitimate, but uhm, then later I found out.  But I would just be, I, I mean it's just unbelievable how horrible he was to her, because I can remember when they'd be visiting during a holiday, and I don't recall that she, she might have been sort of an unpleasant girl, but I can understand why she was (chuckle), and just seemed like suddenly he'd, start screaming at her and she'd have to leave the table and not be with us.  And I just couldn't believe it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>Because that was, that, that whole family situation, I suppose, is another reason that I'm not too sure exactly how I feel about being a female, because when my father had just finished at law school and was just starting and it was right after the depression, so everything was very difficult, and uhm, I guess then he and my mother were married and right after that his father died.  And hadn't had very much since, I don't know how much was lost during the depression, but in any case, there wasn't much of anything to be left for his wife and children.  And both my father's sisters had been brought up in the old fashion idea that a girl stayed in the home and knew how to keep house and so forth, and didn't work, and her father was the one who take, took care of her and then eventually she'd marry and have her own home.  So they weren't at all prepared to have jobs and my parents had to really work to get both of the girls to get away from the home and train to have jobs and they helped pay to have them trained.  And both the girls seemed to want to, but my grandmother was the one who couldn't face having them leave the home, and then, eventually, my father's, one of my father's sisters, the one he was most close to and probably favored, uhm, suddenly died one day and I know everybody believes that she committed suicide and she was just alone with my grandmother who had somehow gotten her to come back into the house again and not keep her job.  And she had been under some psychiatric care, so she obviously had quite a problem and you know, just a lot of things together.  She didn't have a weak heart, and she was said to have died of a heart attack and just everything, everybody's always wondered if she didn't commit suicide.  And so this was on my father's mind and then my aunt who had the child who had trained to be a nurse uhm, started out and everything was, she was being very independent and than she got talked into coming back to my grandmother's by my grandmother and she just kind of petered out and did nothing.  So my father has always had this obsession with girls working and girls being prepared to have a job.  And I, I remember when I was about to go to PEC, his, I think one of his main reasons for not wanting me to go was that then I wouldn't be going into any kind of graduate school to be trained to do some job and he practically cried to me one night and pleaded with me to promise to come back and go to graduate school and of course, one reason why I wanted to go to PEC was, it was, I just couldn't face going to graduate school at that point.  So I couldn't promise him and this upset him terribly.  This is an attitude my mother has too, because she cannot understand my younger sister who really isn't trained to do anything and has just been kind of puttering about.  I don't know, somehow my father accepts that, I don't know why.  And I know my mother, I'm pretty sure my mother accepts it because my father does and it's for his sake that she does.  I do—, I know, sometimes I thought that although she'd maybe never even admitted to herself, I don't think she's ever really understood na and uhm, I think she's gotten very annoyed at her a lot of times but because of this, her reaction is to be overly nice to her.</p>

<p>An awful thought just occurred to me.  I never liked my father's mother and by the time I knew her she was quite ugly and just fat and didn't do anything, and just didn't seem to be very pleasant but uhm, my mother described her when she first met her as being quite attractive and very lively and involved in lots of things.  She used to like to go hunting with my grandfather and doing all the sports he did and she at one point helped him in his office, he was a lawyer and she used to go in there and, I know she fooled around a little with business, and my father always said she had a good business sense and she was interested in poetry and painting and all these things and may have been.  May have had some talent, I don't know but uhm, she was so domineering and then when I knew her, so uninteresting.  And when she was, supposedly when she was younger and gayer, she used to have lots of little whims which my grandfather indulged and it just me think of the fact that I have this streak of needing to be domineering and then also constantly trying to push MSCZ into fulfilling my little whims.  (Silence)</p>

<p>I was just wondering how much a person ever can know what he really thinks too, because you're, I don't know, so, so much of what your parents think are clearly, you're already thinking it too before you're really able to think in any independent way.  Uhm, another thing that's bothered me an awful lot is the whole trend we have today toward a more socialized type of society, and my parents have always had this extremely strong feeling of private property and, to the point of uhm, within the own family, your room is your private property and I know amongst the three of us girls, it was practically never done, that you even borrowed each other's clothes and you certainly didn't go into each other's rooms.  And my mother would have, have looked at anything.  At least I don't think she would have ever looked at anything that we didn't show to her, because it was our private property.  Whereas e's mother will read anything she can get her hands on.  I think she'd steam them open and then shut them up again if she could get away with it.  And just the difference and then also it goes way beyond that too.  If you earn it, and you have a right to earn it if you work hard, then it's yours and it shouldn't be taken away from you and why should you, unless you feel like it, help other people who don't happen to be perhaps as lucky or as smart, as hard workers.  If you've earned it it's yours.  And you have a right to be whatever you want and do whatever you want and this, I don't know, a certain lack of re—, sense of responsibility to other people and it's always disturbed me.  And this part I think is even stronger in my mother than my father, because she's always been just sort of with problems of illegitimate children amongst the people who were having help from social workers, and so forth, and any kind of welfare and anything.  And she's always had this attitude if they start having illegitimate children, they should just be sterilized and there's absolutely no thought to how they might feel and problems they might have and she's always been very critical of the attitude of thinking environment or whatever might have something to do with children being juvenile delinquents or criminals being what they are, and that it's just totally wrong to take this attitude that it's not really their fault, that you should just punish them.  And I can see where it disturbs her if you don't assume they have a certain responsibility because I guess no matter what you are you have to, you can't be anything else unless you assume certain responsibility for yourself, but I know (stammers) it goes beyond that too.  Unless you're their kind, you just don't matter.  (Pause)</p>

<p>Of course, in just thinking about myself, I know that I tell myself, I, well, I have to assume responsibility for what I am and change myself for I'm unhappy with myself, but then I wonder if I, I've really accepted this and, or if I'm not just saying to myself underneath it all, well, this is the way I am and whatever made me this way I can't do anything about it now.  Because something that again came up in this book, uhm, which I had felt and was kind of a horrible thought, and I know it's one aspect of being sort of obsessed with death and everything and how people die and they feel because I'm relieved it's not me.  But also just this attitude of, or this feeling of being overwhelmed by the fact that there are so many people.  And in the book they were saying that, one man was saying, everybody will feel that the solution to the population problem is, well, when there is an accident their reaction is well this will take care of, will be a little bit of something good for the population problem now that at least a fewer, a few fewer people.  And I know I've thought that way sometimes.  And then I'm horrified at myself because it just, it's such a cold way to think.  (Silence)</p>

<p>Something (chuckle) I stored up to talk about, just I remembered, uhm, we wen—, we saw a play last night.  And this was something that everybody at school went to.  Uhm, the school was given a lot of tickets and so during intermission we were just talking about it and I hadn't really liked the beginning.  I thought the staging and scenery was overdone and was, and it annoyed me because there wasn't much else there, and then uhm, this was "Her First Roman"  and I had ce—, what was it, read "Caesar and Cleopatra" and had enjoyed that and, and this just didn't seem to have any of the strength that that had had and so just generally, I wasn't really enjoying it at all and the music wasn't particularly good, but uhm, so somebody, the inevitable question, well how are you liking it and I just said, well, I'm not particularly enjoying it and the scenery and costumes and so forth are annoying me and they said well, that's just what I liked about it because it was the best part if anything was good.  And so immediately I had to change my mind or qualify what I'd said, I couldn't, I didn't have the strength to stand by the fact that I didn't like it.  And it wasn't until somebody else agreed with me that I could say, well that, you know, I really have been feeling that way myself.</p>

<p>And it's funny, if I do disagree, then I have to do it so aggressively that it's kind of ridiculous too, so I, so then the next time I think well, I won't say (chuckle) anything because I would get into such a stupid situation, the time before if I did try to just maintain my opinion, because I think I was a little bit too conscious about trying to maintain my point of view and I was doing it more so I would know I could do it than just because that's the way I felt.  Two things have stuck out in my mind that I think partly make me do that.  Uhm, I know once somebody at a summer camp I went to made a comment about the fact that I seemed to be very dependent on other people and I don't know how they made the remark, but anyway, it made me realize how much I just kind of tagged around others and couldn't ever be alone away from somebody.  And I'd usually have just a few people I'd be very inde—, very dependent on and then in high school a teacher I happened to admire once said something I don't even know why he said it now, to the affect that I didn't have the strength of my own convictions, and that, that made me think well immediately I've got to show myself and others that I can have a conviction and then stand by it.  (Pause)</p>

<p>I could understand now if I began to not have the strength of my own convictions because in a discussion in my family if you are holding a position that is not theirs, they will sort of shout you down and kind of brow beat you and everything and you have, you do have to just kind of quietly maintain whatever you think and after a while it gets kind of pointless to talk at all on a subject you disagree on because they, they're just so, almost obsessed with having to make you agree with them.  But I don't remember things being that way when I grew up and when I would have been affected by that.  And also it just came because basically they can't understand anybody thinking anyway but the way they do.  For instance that friend FGR that I mentioned I think yesterday, friend of my mother's uhm, well she had a much more liberalized way of looking at things than they do and you know, they just kind of, when she's not there, shake their heads sadly and say well, poor FGR just doesn't understand some of these things and that kind of thing.  And then I end up being very confused about where I stand.  For instance, just recently there was a discussion about private colleges and I guess she was discussing this new plan for having it set up so anybody who wants to go to college can go to college, and of course, my parents feel very opposed to this.  And she was trying to point out what good there was in the program, and I don't know, I just didn't know how I felt.  (Silence)</p>

<p>And of course, when I was applying to go to college we were supposed to go to our guidance counselor at school which was the new thing to have at schools and I, I didn't know where I wanted to go, I don't know, I just really didn't, obviously know too much about what I wanted for myself, so there was just one college I'd heard of and I'd heard of it in terms of their nurses program because at one point I had gone through the stage of wanting to be a nurse.  But it happened my sister had ended up going there, my older sister, and so I had this dilemma should I follow, which was my inclination to do anyway, or should I show I could be independent and go someplace else.  And then I'd justify it, well, I al—, I had already planned to go there even before she decided to, so I did end up going there, but in applying, after applying there, there was just no place else I really wanted to go.  And I applied to two other colleges and the guidance counselor told me that well, I wouldn't make ZDH which is where I went.  Just definitely he had very serious doubts about that and he didn't think I'd make TPOC college which is one I applied to and then I applied to VHN as my sure thing and he questioned, he thought maybe I'd get into that and just having this attitude toward me was kind of upsetting.  So I remember I went right to that teacher that I had respected in high school, my English teacher, and he had (clears throat) kind of, I don't know what his attitude was toward me but he had tried to assure me that he had faith that I'd get into ZDH but it was, well, he had sort of a funny attitude.  I guess almost like, well you know, don't worry about it.  I suppose the guidance counselor thought that because I used to on any of those achievement tests we'd be given, I'd always do very badly.  Because I'd read very slowly.  I've always been a slow reader and I, I know one reason I'm a slow reader.  It's because I keep going over and over it because I'm afraid I might miss something and I, and, it's only when I'm under terrific pressure that I can skim and then I realize I can get something out of it by reading fast, but I can't make myself do it unless I have a terrific amount of pressure.  And I suppose the whole thing of just feeling I couldn't do it on those tests sort of, so I wouldn't be able to do it.  But I could always do pretty well on essay tests because then I would get involved in the question and I suppose literally forget myself for a while and be just thinking in terms of the question and I love bringing things together and comparing different things and, and I, I used to enjoy the experience of suddenly seeing relationships during the tests that I hadn't seen before.  So I always did very well in that type of thing.</p>

<p>ANALYST: Our time is up.</p>